	
	
	

	
Empire	of	the	Moghul:	Brothers	at	War
	

	
ALEX	RUTHERFORD
	
	
headline
www.headline.co.uk

	
Copyright	©	2010	Alex	Rutherford

	
The	right	of	Alex	Rutherford	to	be	identified	as	the	Author	of	the	Work	has	been	asserted	by	Alex	Rutherford	in	accordance	with	the
Copyright,	Designs	and	Patents	Act	1988.

	
First	published	as	an	Ebook	by	Headline	Publishing	Group	in	2011.

	
Apart	from	any	use	permitted	under	UK	copyright	law,	this	publication	may	only	be	reproduced,	stored,	or	transmitted,	in	any	form,	or	by
any	means,	with	prior	permission	in	writing	of	the	publishers	or,	in	the	case	of	reprographic	production,	in	accordance	with	the	terms	of
licences	issued	by	the	Copyright	Licensing	Agency.

	
All	characters	in	this	publication	–	other	than	the	obvious	historical	figures	–	are	fictitious	and	any	resemblance	to	real	persons,	living	or
dead,	is	purely	coincidental.

	
Cataloguing	in	Publication	Data	is	available	from	the	British	Library

	
eISBN	:	978	0	7553	8326	9

	
This	Ebook	produced	by	Jouve	Digitalisation	des	Informations.

	
HEADLINE	PUBLISHING	GROUP
	
An	Hachette	Livre	UK	Company	338	Euston	Road	London	NW1	3BH

	
www.headline.co.uk
www.hachette.co.uk

Table	of	Contents
	
Title	Page
Copyright	Page

	
Main	Characters

	
Part	I	-	Brotherly	Love
Chapter	1	-	Riding	the	Tiger
Chapter	2	-	An	Impudent	Enemy
Chapter	3	-	The	Spoils	of	War
Chapter	4	-	In	the	Balance
Chapter	5	-	The	Tyranny	of	the	Stars

	
Part	II	-	In	the	Eye	of	the	Tiger
Chapter	6	-	The	Water-Carrier
Chapter	7	-	A	Promise	Kept
Chapter	8	-	Blood	and	Dust
Chapter	9	-	Brothers
Chapter	10	-	Flight
Chapter	11	-	Hamida
Chapter	12	-	Into	the	Desert
Chapter	13	-	Demon	of	the	Sands
Chapter	14	-	Akbar

	
Part	III	-	Farewell	the	Koh-i-Nur
Chapter	15	-	Shah	Tahmasp
Chapter	16	-	Kandahar
Chapter	17	-	Flesh	and	Blood
Chapter	18	-	A	Visitor	in	the	Night
Chapter	19	-	Riders	in	the	Snow

Chapter	20	-	Kabul

	
Part	IV	-	Return	of	the	Moghuls
Chapter	21	-	A	Brother ’s	Grief
Chapter	22	-	Kamran	Padishah
Chapter	23	-	Doing	Good	to	the	Evil
Chapter	24	-	Warm	Bread
Chapter	25	-	Shock	and	Awe
Chapter	26	-	Victory
Chapter	27	-	The	Stars	Smile	Down
Chapter	28	-	Staircase	to	Heaven

	
Historical	Note
Additional	Notes

Alex	 Rutherford	 lives	 in	 London.	 Brothers	 at	 War	 is	 the	 second	 novel	 in	 the	 Empire	 of	 the	 Moghul
quintet.

Main	Characters
Humayun’s	family
Babur,	Humayun’s	father	and	the	first	Moghul	emperor	
Maham,	Humayun’s	mother	and	Babur ’s	favourite	wife	
Khanzada,	Humayun’s	aunt,	the	sister	of	Babur	
Baisanghar,	Humayun’s	maternal	grandfather	
Kamran,	Humayun’s	eldest	half-brother	
Askari,	Humayun’s	middle	half-brother	and	full	brother	of	Kamran	
Hindal,	Humayun’s	youngest	half-brother	
Gulbadan,	Humayun’s	half-sister	and	full	sister	of	Hindal	
Hamida,	Humayun’s	wife	
Akbar,	Humayun’s	son

	
	
Humayun’s	inner	circle
Kasim,	Humayun’s	vizier
Jauhar,	Humayun’s	attendant	and	later	his	comptroller	of	the	household
Baba	Yasaval,	Humayun’s	master-of-horse
Ahmed	Khan,	Humayun’s	chief	scout	and	later	governor	of	Agra
Sharaf,	Humayun’s	astrologer
Zahid	Beg,	a	senior	commander
Salima,	Humayun’s	favourite	concubine
Suleiman	Mirza,	Humayun’s	cousin	and	general	of	his	cavalry
Maham	Anga,	Akbar ’s	wet-nurse
Adham	Khan,	Akbar ’s	milk-brother
Nadim	Khwaja,	one	of	Humayun’s	commanders	and	Maham
Anga’s	husband

	
	
Others
Gulrukh,	Babur ’s	wife	and	mother	of	Kamran	and	Askari	
Dildar,	Babur ’s	wife	and	mother	of	Hindal	and	Gulbadan	
Nizam,	a	water-carrier	
Zainab,	Hamida’s	waiting	woman	
Sultana,	Moghul	concubine	of	Raja	Maldeo	
Wazim	Pathan,	a	retired	soldier	rewarded	by	Humayun	for	his	courage	
Shaikh	Ali	Akbar,	Hindal’s	vizier	and	father	of	Hamida	

Darya,	son	of	Nasir,	commander	of	Humayun’s	garrison	in	Kabul	
Mustapha	Ergun,	Turkish	cavalry	officer

	
	
Hindustan
Sultan	Bahadur	Shah,	ruler	of	Gujarat	
Tartar	Khan,	member	of	the	previous	ruling	dynasty,	the	Lodi,	defeated	by	Humayun’s	father	Babur,
and	a	claimant	to	the	throne	of	Hindustan	
Sher	Shah,	an	ambitious	ruler	of	humble	origins	in	Bengal	
Islam	Shah,	Sher	Shah’s	son	
Mirza	Husain,	Sultan	of	Sind	
Raja	Maldeo,	ruler	of	Marwar	
Tariq	Khan,	ruler	of	Ferozepur	and	vassal	of	Sher	Shah	
Adil	Shah,	Islam	Shah’s	brother-in-law	and	a	claimant	to	the	throne	of	Hindustan	
Sekunder	Shah,	cousin	of	Islam	Shah	and	claimant	to	the	throne	of	Hindustan

	
	
Persians
Shah	Tahmasp	
Rustum	Beg,	elderly	general	and	cousin	of	Shah	Tahmasp	
Bairam	 Khan,	 nobleman,	 military	 commander	 and	 later	 Humayun’s	 khan-i-khanan,	 commander-inchief

	
	
Humayun’s	ancestors
Genghis	Khan	
Timur,	known	in	the	west	as	Tamburlaine	from	a	corruption	of	Timur-i-Lang	(Timur	the	Lame)	
Ulugh	Beg,	Timur ’s	grandson	and	a	famous	astronomer

‘If	you	wish	to	be	king,	put	brotherly	sentiment	aside	...
This	is	no	brother!	This	is	Your	Majesty’s	foe!’
From	the	Humayunnama	by	Gulbadan,	half-sister	of	Humayun

Part	I
Brotherly	Love

Chapter	1
Riding	the	Tiger
The	 wind	 was	 chill.	 If	 Humayun	 closed	 his	 eyes	 he	 could	 almost	 imagine	 himself	 back	 among	 the
pastures	and	mountains	of	the	Kabul	of	his	boyhood,	rather	than	here	on	the	battlements	of	Agra.	But
the	short	winter	was	ending.	In	a	few	weeks	the	plains	of	Hindustan	would	burn	with	heat	and	dust.
Drawing	 his	 fur-lined	 scarlet	 cloak	 more	 tightly	 around	 him,	 Humayun	 walked	 slowly	 along	 the
walls.	He	had	ordered	his	bodyguards	to	leave	him	because	he	wanted	to	be	alone	with	his	thoughts.
Raising	his	head,	he	gazed	up	into	clear	skies	that	were	splashed	with	stars.	Their	intense,	jewel-like
brightness	never	failed	to	fascinate	him.	It	often	seemed	that	everything	was	written	there	if	only	you
knew	where	to	look	and	how	to	interpret	the	messages	.	.	.
A	 firm,	 light	 footstep	 from	 somewhere	 behind	 him	 disturbed	 him.	 Humayun	 turned,	 wondering
which	 courtier	 or	 guard	 had	 been	 rash	 enough	 to	 disobey	 their	 emperor ’s	 expressed	 wish	 for
solitude.	His	angry	gaze	fell	on	a	slight,	tall	figure	in	purple	robes,	a	thin	gauze	veil	pulled	over	the
lower	face,	with	above	it	the	raisin	eyes	of	his	aunt,	Khanzada.	Humayun’s	expression	relaxed	into	a
smile.
‘We	 are	 waiting	 for	 you	 in	 the	 women’s	 quarters.You	 said	 you	 would	 eat	 with	 us	 tonight.	 Your
mother	complains	you	spend	too	much	time	alone,	and	I	agree	with	her.’
Khanzada	dropped	her	veil.	The	tawny	light	from	a	torch	burning	in	a	sconce	fell	on	a	fine-boned
face	no	longer	as	beautiful	as	in	her	youth	but	one	that	Humayun	had	loved	and	trusted	for	as	many	of
his	 twenty-three	 years	 as	 he	 could	 remember.	 As	 she	 stepped	 a	 little	 closer	 he	 caught	 the	 soft
fragrance	 of	 the	 sandalwood	 that	 burned	 constantly	 in	 jewelled	 golden	 saucers	 in	 the	 women’s
apartments.
‘I	have	much	to	reflect	on.	I	still	find	it	difficult	to	accept	that	my	father	is	dead.’
‘I	understand,	Humayun.	I	loved	him	too.	Babur	was	your	father,	but	don’t	forget	he	was	also	my
little	brother.	He	and	I	went	through	much	together	and	I	never	thought	to	lose	him	so	soon	.	.	.	but	it
was	God’s	will.’
Humayun	 looked	 away,	 unwilling	 for	 even	 Khanzada	 to	 see	 the	 tears	 gleaming	 in	 his	 eyes	 at	 the
thought	that	he	would	never	see	his	father,	the	first	Moghul	emperor,	again.	It	seemed	incredible	that
that	strong,	seasoned	warrior,	who	had	led	his	nomadic	horsemen	down	through	the	mountain	passes
from	 Kabul	 and	 across	 the	 Indus	 to	 found	 an	 empire,	 was	 dead.	 Even	 less	 real	 was	 the	 thought	 that
only	three	months	ago,	with	his	father ’s	eagle-hilted	sword	Alamgir	at	his	waist	and	the	ring	of	his
ancestor	Timur	on	his	finger,	he	himself	had	been	proclaimed	Moghul	emperor.
‘It’s	so	strange	.	.	.like	a	fantasy	from	which	I	keep	expecting	to	wake.’
‘It’s	the	real	world	and	you	must	accept	it.	Everything	Babur	wanted,	everything	he	fought	for,	had
one	purpose	only	–	to	win	an	empire	and	found	a	dynasty.	You	know	that	as	well	as	I	–	weren’t	you
fighting	at	your	father ’s	side	when	he	crushed	Sultan	Ibrahim	Lodi	at	Panipat	to	claim	Hindustan	for
the	Moghuls?’
Humayun	 said	 nothing.	 Instead	 he	 looked	 up	 once	 more	 at	 the	 sky.	 As	 he	 did	 so,	 a	 shooting	 star

sped	across	the	heavens	and	vanished,	leaving	not	even	a	trace	of	its	fiery	tail.	Glancing	at	Khanzada,
he	saw	that	she	had	seen	it	too.
‘Perhaps	the	shooting	star	was	an	omen.	Perhaps	it	means	my	reign	will	fizzle	out	ingloriously	.	.	.
that	no	one	will	remember	me	.	.	.’
‘Such	self-doubt	and	hesitancy	would	anger	your	father	if	he	were	here	now.	Instead	he	would	have
you	embrace	your	destiny.	He	could	have	chosen	one	of	your	three	half-brothers	as	his	heir,	but	he
selected	 you.	 Not	 just	 because	 you	 are	 the	 eldest	 –	 that	 has	 never	 been	 the	 way	 of	 our	 people	 –	 but
because	he	thought	you	were	the	most	worthy,	the	most	able.	Our	hold	on	Hindustan	is	precarious	–
we	have	been	here	only	five	years	and	dangers	press	in	from	every	side.	Babur	picked	you	because	he
trusted	 not	 just	 in	 your	 courage,	 which	 you	 had	 already	 demonstrated	 on	 the	 battlefield,	 but	 also	 in
your	inner	strength	and	your	self-belief,	your	sense	of	our	family’s	right	to	rule,	which	our	dynasty
must	have	to	survive	and	prosper	here	in	this	new	land.’	Khanzada	paused.
When	Humayun	did	not	reply,	she	raised	her	face	to	the	light	of	the	torch	and	ran	her	finger	down	a
thin	white	scar	extending	from	her	right	eyebrow	almost	to	her	chin.	‘Do	not	forget	how	I	got	this,
how	when	I	was	young	and	your	father	had	to	abandon	Samarkand	to	the	Uzbeks	I	was	seized	by	their
chieftain	 Shaibani	 Khan	 and	 forced	 to	 submit	 to	 him.	 He	 hated	 all	 who,	 like	 us,	 have	 the	 blood	 of
Timur.	 It	 gave	 him	 pleasure	 to	 humiliate	 and	 degrade	 a	 princess	 of	 our	 house.	 I	 give	 thanks	 that	 I
never	despaired	all	the	time	I	was	a	captive	in	his	haram	.	.	.	never	forgot	who	I	was	or	that	it	was	my
duty	 to	 survive.	 Remember	 that	 when	 another	 woman	 attacked	 me	 and	 stole	 some	 of	 my	 beauty,	 I
wore	this	scar	as	a	badge	of	honour	–	to	show	that	I	was	still	alive	and	that	one	day	I	would	be	free.
After	ten	long	years	that	day	came.	I	rejoined	my	brother	and	rejoiced	to	see	him	drink	to	my	return
from	a	vessel	made	from	the	skull	of	Shaibani	Khan.	You	must	have	the	same	self-belief,	the	same
strength	of	character,	Humayun,	as	I	had.’
‘Such	courage	as	yours	is	hard	to	emulate,	but	I	will	not	fail	my	father	or	our	house.’
‘What	 is	 it,	 then?	 You	 are	 young,	 ambitious	 .	 .	 .	 you	 were	 eager	 for	 the	 throne	 long	 before	 your
father	fell	ill.	Babur	knew;	he	spoke	to	me	of	it.’
‘His	death	was	so	sudden	when	it	came.	I	left	so	much	unsaid.	I	didn’t	feel	ready	to	be	emperor	.	.	.
at	least	not	so	soon,	nor	in	such	a	way.’
Humayun	let	his	head	drop.	It	was	true.	His	father ’s	final	moments	still	haunted	him.	Summoning
the	last	of	his	strength,	Babur	had	ordered	his	attendants	to	dress	him	in	his	royal	robes,	seat	him	on
his	throne	and	call	his	nobles	to	him.	Before	the	entire	court,	in	a	weak	voice	but	firm	in	his	resolve,
Babur	had	ordered	Humayun	to	take	Timur ’s	heavy	gold	ring,	engraved	with	the	head	of	a	snarling
tiger,	from	his	finger,	saying,	‘Wear	it	with	pride,	and	never	forget	the	duties	it	imposes	on	you	.	.	.’
But	 Babur	 had	 been	 just	 forty-seven,	 still	 in	 his	 prime	 and	 far	 too	 young	 to	 hand	 on	 his	 fledgling
empire.
‘No	man,	not	even	an	emperor,	can	know	when	he	will	be	called	to	Paradise	and	in	what	manner.
None	 of	 us	 can	 predict	 or	 control	 fully	 the	 course	 of	 our	 lives.	 Learning	 to	 live	 with	 the	 great
uncertainty	of	mortality	as	well	as	the	other	vicissitudes	of	fortune	is	part	of	growing	to	adulthood.’
‘Yes.	 But	 I	 often	 think	 there	 is	 more	 we	 can	 do	 to	 understand	 the	 underlying	 patterns	 behind	 our
lives.	Events	that	appear	random	may	not	be.	For	example,	Aunt,	you	said	just	now	that	my	father ’s
death	was	God’s	will,	but	you’re	wrong.	It	was	my	father ’s	will.	He	deliberately	sacrificed	himself	for
me.’
Khanzada	stared.	‘What	d’you	mean?’
‘I’ve	never	revealed	to	anyone	my	father ’s	last	words	to	me.	Just	before	he	died,	he	whispered	that
when	I	was	sick	with	fever	a	few	months	earlier,	my	astrologer,	Sharaf,	had	told	him	that	he’d	read	in

the	stars	that	if	he	wished	me	to	live	he	must	offer	up	what	was	most	precious	to	him.	So	falling	on	his
face	he	offered	God	his	life	for	mine.’
‘Then	it	was	indeed	God’s	will	–	God	accepted	the	sacrifice.’
‘No!	Sharaf	told	me	that	all	he	intended	was	that	my	father	should	offer	up	the	Koh-i-Nur	diamond
–	not	his	life.	But	my	father	misinterpreted	his	words	.	.	.	It	seems	overwhelming	that	my	father	loved
me	so	much,	saw	me	as	so	important	to	the	future	of	our	dynasty,	that	he	offered	his	own	life.	How
can	I	live	up	to	such	faith	in	me?	I	feel	that	I	don’t	deserve	the	throne	I	once	so	hungered	for.	I	fear
that	a	reign	that	began	in	such	a	way	will	be	tainted	.	.	.’
‘Such	thoughts	are	absurd.You	search	too	hard	for	patterns	of	cause	and	consequence.	Many	a	reign
begins	in	loss	and	uncertainty.	It	is	up	to	you	to	make	sure	by	your	own	actions	that	yours	doesn’t	end
so.	Any	sacrifice	Babur	made	was	done	through	love	for	you	and	trust	in	you.	Remember	also	he	did
not	 die	 immediately	 –	 you	 recovered	 and	 he	 lived	 eight	 more	 months.	 His	 death	 at	 that	 time	 might
well	 have	 been	 pure	 coincidence.’	 Khanzada	 paused.	 ‘Did	 he	 say	 anything	 else	 to	 you	 in	 his	 last
moments?’
‘He	told	me	not	to	grieve	.	.	.	he	was	happy	to	go.	He	also	made	me	promise	to	do	nothing	against
my	half-brothers,	however	much	they	might	deserve	it.’
Khanzada’s	face	tautened.	For	a	moment	Humayun	thought	she	was	about	to	say	something	about
his	brothers,	but	instead,	with	a	toss	of	her	small,	elegant	head,	she	seemed	to	think	better	of	it.
‘Come.	That’s	about	enough	of	these	musings.	The	cloth	is	spread	in	the	haram.	You	must	not	keep
your	mother	and	the	other	ladies	waiting.	But	Humayun	.	.	.	one	last	thought.	Don’t	forget	that	your
name	means	“fortunate”.	Fortune	will	be	yours	if	you	will	be	strong	in	mind	as	well	as	in	body	and
seize	it.	Banish	these	foolish	self-doubts	of	yours.	Introspection	may	become	a	poet	or	a	mystic	but	it
has	 no	 place	 in	 the	 life	 of	 an	 emperor.	 Grasp	 with	 both	 hands	 what	 fate	 –	 and	 your	 father	 –	 have
bequeathed	you.’
With	a	last	look	up	at	the	sky	that	showed	him	that	the	moon	was	now	obscured	by	cloud,	Humayun
slowly	followed	his	aunt	towards	the	stone	staircase	that	led	down	to	the	women’s	apartments.

Prostrating	 himself	 before	 Humayun	 in	 the	 emperor ’s	 private	 chambers	 some	 weeks	 later,	 Baba
Yasaval,	his	usually	blunt,	ebullient	master-of-horse,	looked	strangely	nervous.	As	the	man	rose	again
and	looked	up	at	him,	Humayun	noticed	that	his	skin	seemed	stretched	unnaturally	tight	over	his	wide
cheekbones	and	a	pulse	throbbed	at	his	temple.
‘Majesty,	if	I	might	speak	to	you	alone?’	Baba	Yasaval	glanced	at	the	guards	positioned	on	either
side	of	Humayun’s	low	silver	chair.	It	was	an	unusual	request.	Security	dictated	that	the	emperor	was
seldom	on	his	own	–	even	when	he	was	in	the	haram	guards	were	always	near	at	hand,	ready	to	turn
an	assassin’s	blade.	But	Baba	Yasaval,	who	had	fought	loyally	for	Humayun’s	father,	could	be	trusted.
Humayun	 dismissed	 his	 guards	 from	 the	 chamber	 and	 beckoned	 Baba	 Yasaval	 closer.	 The	 man
approached	 but	 hesitated	 before	 speaking,	 scratching	 his	 stubbly	 scalp	 which,	 to	 remind	 him	 of	 the
old	ways	of	his	clan,	since	arriving	in	Hindustan	he	had	taken	to	shaving,	except	for	a	single	lock	of
coarse,	greying	hair	that	swung	like	a	tassel.
‘Baba	Yasaval,	speak.	What	is	it	you	wish	to	tell	me?’
‘Bad	news	.	.	.	terrible	news,	Majesty	.	.	.’	A	sigh	that	was	almost	a	groan	escaped	Baba	Yasaval’s

lips.	‘There	is	a	plot	against	you.’
‘A	plot?’	Humayun’s	hand	instinctively	reached	for	the	jewelled	dagger	tucked	into	his	yellow	sash,
and	before	he	knew	it	he	had	risen	to	his	feet.	‘Who	would	dare	.	.	.	?’
Baba	Yasaval	bowed	his	head.	‘Your	half-brothers,	Majesty.’
‘My	brothers	.	.	.	?’	Only	two	months	ago	he	and	they	had	stood	side	by	side	in	the	courtyard	of	the
Agra	 fort	 as	 the	 gilded	 cart	 drawn	 by	 twelve	 black	 oxen	 and	 bearing	 their	 father ’s	 silver	 coffin
departed	on	the	long	journey	to	Kabul,	where	Babur	had	asked	to	be	buried.	His	half-brothers’	faces
had	been	as	marked	by	grief	as	his	own	and	in	those	moments	he	had	felt	a	rush	of	affection	for	them
and	a	confidence	that	they	would	help	him	complete	the	task	their	father	had	left	unfinished:	making
the	Moghuls’	hold	on	Hindustan	unassailable.
Baba	Yasaval	read	the	incredulity	and	shock	on	Humayun’s	face.	‘Majesty,	I	speak	the	truth,	though
I	 wish	 for	 all	 our	 sakes	 that	 I	 did	 not	 .	 .	 .’	 Now	 that	 he	 had	 started,	 Baba	 Yasaval	 seemed	 to	 take
courage,	becoming	again	the	tough	warrior	who	had	fought	for	the	Moghuls	at	Panipat.	His	head	was
no	longer	bowed	and	he	looked	unflinching	into	Humayun’s	eyes.	‘You	will	not	doubt	me	when	I	tell
you	that	I	have	this	information	from	my	youngest	son	.	.	.	he	is	one	of	the	conspirators.	He	came	to
me	just	an	hour	ago	and	confessed	everything.’
‘Why	should	he	do	that?’	Humayun’s	eyes	narrowed.
‘Because	he	fears	for	his	life	.	.	.	because	he	realises	he	has	been	foolish	.	.	.	because	he	knows	his
actions	will	bring	ruin	and	disgrace	on	our	clan.’	As	he	spoke	these	last	words,	Baba	Yasaval’s	face
creased	as	he	struggled	to	contain	his	emotions.
‘You	have	done	well	to	approach	me.	Tell	me	everything.’
‘Scarcely	 a	 fortnight	 after	 His	 Majesty	 your	 father ’s	 coffin	 left	 for	 Kabul,	 the	 princes	 Kamran,
Askari	and	Hindal	met	in	a	fort	two	days’	ride	from	here.	My	son,	as	you	know,	serves	Kamran,	who
offered	him	great	rewards	to	join	the	plot.	Hot-headed	young	fool	that	he	is,	he	agreed,	and	so	heard
and	saw	everything.’
‘What	are	my	brothers	planning?’
‘To	take	you	prisoner	and	force	you	to	break	up	the	empire	and	yield	some	of	your	territories	to
them.	They	wish	to	return	to	the	old	traditions,	Majesty,	when	every	son	was	entitled	to	a	share	of	his
father ’s	lands.’
Humayun	managed	a	mirthless	smile.	‘And	then	what?	Will	they	be	content?	Of	course	not.	How
long	before	they	will	be	at	each	other ’s	throats	and	our	enemies	begin	to	circle?’
‘You	 are	 right,	 Majesty.	 Even	 now,	 they	 can’t	 agree	 amongst	 themselves.	 Kamran	 is	 the	 real
instigator.	The	plot	was	his	idea	and	he	persuaded	the	others	to	join	him,	but	then	he	and	Askari	came
almost	to	blows	over	which	of	them	was	to	have	the	richest	provinces.	Their	men	had	to	pull	them
apart.’
Humayun	 sat	 down	 again.	 Baba	 Yasaval’s	 words	 rang	 true.	 His	 half-brother	 Kamran,	 just	 five
months	his	junior,	had	made	no	secret	of	his	resentment	that	while	he	had	been	left	behind	to	govern
as	 regent	 in	 Kabul,	 Humayun	 had	 accompanied	 their	 father	 on	 his	 invasion	 of	 Hindustan.	 Fifteenyear-old	 Askari,	 Kamran’s	 full	 brother,	 would	 not	 have	 been	 hard	 to	 persuade	 to	 join	 in.	 He	 had
always	 followed	 worshipfully	 where	 Kamran	 led	 despite	 being	 both	 bullied	 and	 patronised	 by	 him.
But	 if	 Baba	 Yasaval’s	 account	 was	 accurate,	 now	 he	 was	 almost	 a	 man	 Askari	 wasn’t	 afraid	 to
challenge	his	older	brother.	Perhaps	their	strong-willed	mother	Gulrukh	had	encouraged	them	both.
But	what	about	his	youngest	half-brother?	Why	had	Hindal	become	involved?	He	was	just	twelve
years	 old	 and	 Humayun’s	 own	 mother,	 Maham,	 had	 brought	 him	 up.Years	 ago,	 distressed	 at	 her
inability	 to	 bear	 any	 more	 children	 after	 Humayun,	 she	 had	 begged	 Babur	 to	 give	 her	 the	 child	 of

another	of	his	wives,	Dildar.	Though	Hindal	had	still	been	in	the	womb,	Babur	–	unable	to	deny	his
favourite	 wife	 –	 had	 made	 Maham	 a	 gift	 of	 the	 child.	 But	 perhaps	 he	 should	 not	 be	 so	 surprised	 at
Hindal’s	 treachery.	 Babur	 himself	 had	 been	 just	 twelve	 when	 he	 had	 first	 become	 a	 king.	 Ambition
could	flare	in	even	the	youngest	prince.
‘Majesty.’	Baba	Yasaval’s	earnest	voice	brought	Humayun	back	to	the	present.	‘My	son	believed	the
plot	had	been	abandoned	because	the	princes	could	not	agree.	But	last	night	they	met	again,	here	in	the
Agra	fort.	They	decided	to	bury	their	differences	until	they	had	you	in	their	power.	They	plan	to	take
advantage	 of	 what	 they	 call	 your	 “unkingly	 desire	 for	 solitude”	 and	 attack	 you	 when	 you	 next	 go
riding	alone.	Kamran	even	spoke	of	killing	you	and	making	it	appear	like	an	accident.	It	was	then	that
my	 son	 came	 to	 his	 senses.	 Realising	 the	 danger	 to	 Your	 Majesty,	 he	 told	 me	 what	 he	 should	 have
confessed	weeks	ago.’
‘I	am	grateful	to	you,	Baba	Yasaval,	for	your	loyalty	and	bravery	in	coming	to	me	like	this.You	are
right.	It	is	a	terrible	thing	that	my	half-brothers	should	plot	against	me,	and	so	soon	after	our	father ’s
death.	Have	you	mentioned	this	to	anyone	else?’
‘No	one,	Majesty.’
‘Good.	Make	sure	you	keep	it	to	yourself.	Leave	me	now.	I	need	to	consider	what	to	do.’
Baba	Yasaval	hesitated,	then	instead	of	departing	threw	himself	on	the	ground	before	Humayun.	He
looked	 up	 with	 tears	 in	 his	 eyes.	 ‘Majesty,	 my	 son,	 my	 foolish	 son	 .	 .	 .	 spare	 him	 .	 .	 .	 he	 sincerely
repents	his	errors.	He	knows	–	and	I	know	–	how	much	he	deserves	your	wrath	and	punishment,	but	I
beg	you,	show	him	mercy	.	.	.’
‘Baba	 Yasaval.	 To	 show	 my	 gratitude	 to	 you	 not	 only	 for	 this	 information	 but	 for	 all	 your	 past
services	I	will	not	punish	your	son.	His	actions	were	the	indiscretions	of	a	simple	youth.	But	keep	him
close	confined	till	all	this	is	over.’
A	tremor	seemed	to	pass	through	Baba	Yasaval	and	for	a	moment	he	closed	his	eyes.	Then	he	rose
and,	shaven	head	bowed,	backed	slowly	away.
As	soon	as	he	was	alone,	Humayun	leaped	to	his	feet	and	seizing	a	jewelled	cup	flung	it	across	the
chamber.	The	fools!	The	idiots!	If	his	brothers	had	their	way,	the	Moghuls	would	quickly	return	to	a
nomadic	life	of	petty	tribal	rivalries	and	lose	their	hard-won	empire.Where	was	their	sense	of	destiny,
their	sense	of	what	they	owed	their	father?
Just	five	years	ago	Humayun	had	ridden	by	Babur ’s	side	as	they	swept	down	through	the	Khyber
Pass	to	glory.	His	pulses	still	quickened	at	the	memory	of	the	roar	and	blood	of	battle,	the	odour	of
his	 stallion’s	 acrid	 sweat	 filling	 his	 nostrils,	 the	 trumpeting	 of	 Sultan	 Ibrahim’s	 war	 elephants,	 the
boom	of	Moghul	cannon	and	the	crack	of	Moghul	muskets	as	these	new	weapons	cut	down	rank	after
rank	of	the	enemy.	He	could	still	recall	the	ecstatic	joy	of	victory	when	–	bloodstained	sword	in	hand
–	he	had	surveyed	the	dusty	plains	of	Panipat	and	realised	that	Hindustan	was	Moghul.	Now	all	that
was	being	put	at	risk.
I’ll	 not	 have	 it	 –	 this	 taktya,	 takhta,	 ‘throne	 or	 coffin’	 as	 our	 people	 called	 it	 when	 we	 ruled	 in
Central	 Asia.	 We’re	 in	 a	 new	 land	 and	 must	 adopt	 new	 ways	 or	 we’ll	 lose	 everything,	 Humayun
thought.	Reaching	inside	his	robe	for	the	key	he	wore	round	his	neck	on	a	slender	gold	chain,	he	rose
and	 went	 to	 a	 domed	 casket	 in	 a	 corner	 of	 the	 chamber.	 He	 unlocked	 it,	 pushed	 back	 the	 lid	 and
quickly	found	what	he	was	seeking	–	a	flowered	silk	bag	secured	with	a	twist	of	gold	cord.	He	opened
the	 bag	 slowly,	 almost	 reverently,	 and	 drew	 out	 the	 contents	 –	 a	 large	 diamond	 whose	 translucent
brilliance	made	him	catch	his	breath	each	time	he	saw	it.	‘My	Koh-i-Nur,	my	Mountain	of	Light,’	he
whispered,	running	his	fingers	over	the	shining	facets.	Presented	to	him	by	an	Indian	princess	whose
family	 he	 had	 protected	 in	 the	 chaos	 after	 the	 battle	 of	 Panipat,	 it	 possessed	 a	 flawless	 beauty	 that

always	seemed	to	him	the	embodiment	of	everything	the	Moghuls	had	come	to	India	to	find	–	glory
and	magnificence	to	outshine	even	the	Shah	of	Persia.
Still	holding	the	gem,	Humayun	returned	to	his	chair	to	think.	He	sat	brooding	and	alone	until	the
sound	of	the	court	timekeeper,	the	ghariyali,	striking	his	brass	disc	in	the	courtyard	below	to	signal
the	end	of	his	pahar	–	his	watch	–	reminded	him	that	night	was	falling.
This	was	his	first	major	test,	he	realised,	and	he	would	rise	to	it.	Whatever	his	personal	feelings	–
at	this	moment	he’d	like	to	take	all	of	his	half-brothers	by	the	neck	in	turn	and	throttle	the	life	from
them	 –	 he	 must	 do	 nothing	 rash,	 nothing	 to	 show	 that	 the	 plot	 had	 been	 betrayed.	 BabaYasaval’s
request	 for	 a	 private	 audience	 would	 have	 been	 noticed.	 If	 only	 his	 grandfather	 Baisanghar,	 or	 his
vizier	 Kasim,	 who	 had	 been	 one	 of	 his	 father ’s	 most	 trusted	 advisers,	 were	 here.	 But	 the	 two	 older
men	had	accompanied	Babur ’s	funeral	cortège	to	Kabul	to	oversee	his	burial	there.	They	would	not
return	for	some	months.	His	father	had	once	spoken	to	him	of	the	burden	of	kingship,	the	loneliness	it
brought.	For	the	first	time,	Humayun	was	beginning	to	understand	what	Babur	had	meant.	He	knew
that	he	and	he	alone	must	decide	what	to	do,	and	until	then	he	must	keep	his	own	counsel.
Feeling	the	need	to	calm	himself,	Humayun	decided	to	pass	the	night	with	his	favourite	among	his
concubines	 –	 a	 pliant,	 full-mouthed,	 grey-eyed	 young	 woman	 from	 the	 mountains	 north	 of	 Kabul.
With	 her	 silken	 skin	 and	 breasts	 like	 young	 pomegranates,	 Salima	 knew	 how	 to	 transport	 his	 body
and	 patently	 enjoyed	 doing	 so.	 Perhaps	 her	 caresses	 would	 also	 help	 clear	 his	 mind	 and	 order	 his
thoughts	and	thus	lighten	the	road	ahead,	which	seemed	suddenly	and	ominously	dark.
Three	hours	later,	Humayun	lay	back	naked	against	a	silk-covered	bolster	in	Salima’s	room	in	the
haram.	His	muscular	body,	scarred	as	befitted	a	tested	warrior,	gleamed	with	the	almond	oil	she	had
teasingly	massaged	into	his	skin	until,	unable	to	wait	a	moment	longer,	he	had	pulled	her	to	him.	Her
robe	 of	 transparent	 pale	 yellow	 muslin	 –	 a	 product	 of	 Humayun’s	 new	 lands	 where	 weavers	 spun
cloth	of	such	delicacy	they	gave	it	names	like	‘breath	of	wind’	or	‘dawn	dew’	–	lay	discarded	on	the
flower-patterned	carpet.	Though	the	pleasure	Salima	had	given	him	and	her	response	to	him	had	been
as	 intense	 as	 ever	 and	 Humayun	 had	 relaxed,	 his	 mind	 kept	 drifting	 back	 to	 Baba	 Yasaval’s
revelations,	re-igniting	his	anger	and	frustration.
‘Bring	me	some	rosewater	to	drink,	Salima,	please.’
She	 returned	 moments	 later	 with	 a	 silver	 cup	 inlaid	 with	 roundels	 of	 rose	 quartz.	 The	 water	 –
chilled	 by	 ice	 carried	 down	 in	 huge	 slabs	 from	 the	 northern	 mountains	 by	 camel	 trains	 –	 smelled
good.	From	a	small	wooden	box	beside	the	bed,	Humayun	extracted	some	opium	pellets	and	dropped
them	into	the	cup,	where	they	dissolved	in	a	milky	swirl.
‘Drink.’	 He	 raised	 the	 cup	 to	 Salima’s	 lips	 and	 watched	 her	 swallow.	 He	 wished	 her	 to	 share	 his
pleasure,	but	somewhat	to	his	shame	he	also	had	another	purpose	in	doing	so.	His	father	had	nearly
died	when	Buwa	–	mother	of	his	defeated	enemy	Sultan	Ibrahim	–	had	tried	to	poison	him	in	revenge
for	the	death	of	her	son.	Since	then,	Humayun	had	been	wary	of	anything	untasted	by	others	.	.	.
‘Here,	Majesty.’	Salima,	lips	lusciously	moist	with	rosewater,	kissed	him	and	handed	him	the	cup.
He	 drank	 deeply,	 willing	 the	 opium	 that	 in	 recent	 weeks	 had	 helped	 blunt	 his	 grief	 and	 lessen	 his
anxieties	to	do	its	work,	uncoiling	softly	through	his	mind	and	carrying	him	to	pleasurable	oblivion.
But	maybe	tonight	he	had	taken	too	much	or	was	expecting	too	much	of	its	soothing	powers.	As	he
lay	 back,	 portentous	 images	 began	 forming	 in	 his	 mind.The	 gleaming	 blue	 domes	 and	 slender
minarets	 of	 an	 exquisite	 city	 rose	 before	 him.	 Though	 he’d	 been	 too	 young	 to	 remember	 his	 brief
time	there,	he	knew	it	was	Samarkand,	capital	of	his	great	ancestor	Timur	and	the	city	his	father	had
captured,	 lost	 and	 yearned	 for	 all	 his	 life.	 From	 Babur ’s	 vivid	 accounts,	 Humayun	 knew	 he	 was
standing	 in	 the	 Registan	 Square	 in	 the	 centre	 of	 the	 city.	 A	 crouching	 orange	 tiger	 on	 the	 soaring

gateway	 before	 him	 was	 coming	 alive	 as	 he	 watched,	 ears	 flattened,	 lips	 drawn	 back	 over	 pointed
teeth,	ready	to	spit	defiance.	Its	eyes	were	green	as	Kamran’s.
Suddenly,	 Humayun	 felt	 himself	 on	 the	 tiger ’s	 back,	 wrestling	 it	 with	 all	 his	 strength,	 feeling	 its
sinewy	body	twist	beneath	him.	He	gripped	hard	with	his	thighs,	smelling	its	hot	breath	as,	arcing	its
body	and	swinging	its	head	from	side	to	side,	it	fought	to	dislodge	him.	Humayun	locked	his	legs	yet
tighter	around	the	animal	and	felt	its	flanks	writhe	and	plunge	anew.	He	would	not	be	thrown	off.	He
leaned	 forward,	 sliding	 his	 hands	 beneath	 its	 body.	 His	 fingers	 encountered	 flesh	 that	 was	 soft	 and
smooth	and	within	it	a	warm,	rhythmic	pulse,	the	source	of	its	life	force.	As	he	began	to	grip	harder,
to	press	and	to	thrust,	the	beast’s	breath	came	in	jerky,	rasping	gasps.
‘Majesty	.	.	.	please	.	.	.’
Another,	weaker	voice	was	trying	to	reach	him.	It,	too,	was	gasping	for	breath.	Opening	his	eyes
and	looking	down	through	his	dilated	pupils,	Humayun	saw	not	a	wild	tiger	but	Salima.	Her	body,	like
his,	was	running	with	sweat	as	if	the	moment	of	climax	were	approaching.	But	though	he	was	indeed
possessing	her,	his	hands	were	grasping	the	soft	flesh	of	her	breasts	as	if	Salima	were	the	ravaging
beast	he	was	fighting	to	subdue.	He	relaxed	his	grip	but	continued	to	thrust	harder	and	harder	until
finally	they	both	climaxed	and	collapsed.
‘Salima,	I’m	sorry.	I	should	not	have	used	you	in	such	a	way.	I	felt	thoughts	of	conquest	mingling
with	my	desire	for	you.’
‘No	need	for	sorrow	–	your	love-making	filled	me	with	pleasure.You	were	in	another	world	and	I
was	willingly	serving	you	in	that	world	as	I	do	in	this.	I	know	you	would	never	intentionally	hurt	me.
Now	make	love	to	me	again,	this	time	more	softly.’
Humayun	 gladly	 complied.	 Later,	 as	 he	 lay	 back	 exhausted	 and	 still	 dazed	 by	 opium,	 haram
attendants	 came	 to	 sponge	 his	 body	 with	 cool	 scented	 water.	 Finally,	 wrapped	 in	 Salima’s	 arms,	 he
found	sleep.	This	time	he	dreamed	of	nothing	at	all,	waking	only	when	the	soft	light	began	shafting
through	the	latticed	window	of	the	room.	As	he	watched	the	strengthening	rays	play	over	the	carved
sandstone	ceiling	above	him,	he	knew	what	he	must	do.	His	battle	of	wills	with	the	tiger	had	told	him.
He	was	the	ruler.	He	should	not	always	be	gentle.	Respect	was	won	by	knowing	when	to	be	strong	too.

‘Majesty.	Your	orders	have	been	carried	out.’
From	his	throne	on	its	marble	dais	in	the	audience	chamber	–	the	durbar	hall	–	with	his	courtiers
and	commanders	positioned	around	him	in	strict	order	of	precedence,	Humayun	looked	down	at	the
captain	 of	 his	 bodyguard.	 He	 already	 knew	 what	 had	 happened	 –	 the	 officer	 had	 come	 to	 him	 soon
after	midnight	–	but	it	was	important	that	all	the	court	should	hear	it	and	witness	the	scene	about	to
take	place.
‘You	have	done	well.	Tell	the	court	what	occurred.’
‘As	 Your	 Majesty	 instructed,	 I	 and	 a	 detachment	 of	 guards	 arrested	 your	 half-brothers	 last	 night
while	they	were	feasting	in	Prince	Kamran’s	apartments.’
As	a	collective	gasp	went	up	around	him,	Humayun	smiled	inwardly.	He	had	chosen	his	time	well.
Since	Baba	Yasaval’s	warning	he	had	kept	safely	within	the	fort.	Then	a	week	ago	a	consignment	of
red	wine	from	Ghazni,	the	finest	the	kingdom	of	Kabul	could	produce,	heady	and	rich,	had	arrived	by
mule	 train	 –	 a	 timely	 gift	 from	 his	 mother ’s	 father,	 Baisanghar.	 Knowing	 Kamran’s	 love	 of	 wine,

Humayun	had	presented	some	to	him.	As	he	had	guessed,	Kamran’s	invitation	to	all	his	brothers	to
join	him	in	drinking	it	had	not	been	long	in	coming.	Humayun	himself	had	declined	it	graciously	but
Askari	 and	 even	 young	 Hindal,	 not	 yet	 of	 an	 age	 to	 enjoy	 drinking	 but	 doubtless	 flattered	 to	 be	 in
company	 with	 those	 who	 did,	 had	 hurried	 eagerly	 to	 the	 party.	 With	 all	 three	 together	 and	 off	 their
guard,	the	opportunity	for	decisive	action	had	been	perfect.
‘Did	my	brothers	resist?’
‘Prince	Kamran	drew	his	dagger	and	wounded	one	of	my	men,	slicing	off	part	of	his	ear,	but	he
was	soon	overcome.	The	others	did	not	try	to	fight.’
Humayun’s	gaze	swept	the	faces	before	him.	‘Some	days	ago,	I	received	word	of	a	plot.	My	halfbrothers	intended	to	kidnap	me	and	force	me	to	relinquish	some	of	my	lands	–	perhaps	even	kill	me.’
His	 courtiers	 looked	 suitably	 shocked.	 How	 many	 were	 play-acting,	 Humayun	 wondered.	 Some,	 at
least,	 must	 have	 known	 of	 the	 conspiracy,	 even	 tacitly	 acquiesced	 in	 it.	 A	 number	 of	 the	 tribal
chieftains	who	had	accompanied	Babur	on	his	conquest	of	Hindustan	had	never	adjusted	to	their	new
home.	They	disliked	this	new	land	with	its	featureless,	seemingly	endless	plains,	hot,	gritty	winds	and
drenching	monsoon	rains.	In	their	hearts,	they	longed	for	the	snow-dusted	mountains	and	cool	rivers
of	 their	 homelands	 over	 the	 Khyber	 Pass	 and	 beyond.	 Quite	 a	 few	 would	 have	 welcomed	 an
opportunity	to	collude	with	the	conspirators	that	would	enable	them	to	return	home	richly	rewarded.
Well,	let	them	sweat	a	bit	now	.	.	.
‘Fetch	my	brothers	before	me	so	that	I	can	question	them	as	to	their	associates.’
The	silence	was	absolute	as	Humayun	and	his	courtiers	waited.	At	last,	the	sound	of	metal	chains
scraping	the	stone	slabs	of	the	courtyard	beyond	the	audience	chamber	broke	the	silence.	Looking	up,
Humayun	saw	his	brothers	enter	in	a	stumbling	line,	half	dragged	along	by	the	guards.	Kamran	was
first,	 his	 hawk-nosed,	 thin-lipped	 face	 showing	 nothing	 but	 disdain.	 He	 might	 have	 shackles	 on	 his
legs	but	the	proud	carriage	of	his	head	showed	he	had	no	intention	of	pleading.	Askari,	shorter	and
slighter,	 was	 another	 matter.	 His	 unshaven	 face	 was	 creased	 with	 terror	 and	 his	 small	 eyes	 looked
beseechingly	 at	 Humayun	 from	 beneath	 his	 dark	 brows.	 Hindal,	 at	 first	 half	 hidden	 behind	 his	 two
elder	 brothers,	 was	 gazing	 about	 him,	 his	 young	 face	 beneath	 his	 tangle	 of	 hair	 blank	 rather	 than
fearful,	as	if	what	was	happening	were	beyond	him
As	 the	 guards	 stepped	 back	 from	 them,	 Askari	 and	 Hindal,	 though	 hampered	 by	 their	 chains,
prostrated	themselves	full	length	on	the	ground	before	Humayun	in	the	traditional	obeisance	of	the
korunush.	 After	 several	 moments’	 hesitation,	 and	 with	 a	 contemptuous	 half-smile,	 Kamran	 did	 the
same.
‘On	your	feet.’
Humayun	waited	until	all	three	had	struggled	to	stand.	Now	that	he	could	study	them	more	closely
he	saw	that	Kamran	had	a	dark	bruise	on	the	side	of	his	face.
‘What	 have	 you	 to	 say	 for	 yourselves?	 You	 are	 my	 half-brothers.	 Why	 did	 you	 scheme	 against
me?’
‘We	didn’t	.	.	.	it’s	not	true	.	.	.’	Askari’s	tone,	shrill	and	nervous,	was	unconvincing.
‘You’re	lying.	It’s	written	on	your	face.	If	you	do	so	again,	I’ll	have	you	put	to	the	torture.	Kamran,
as	the	eldest,	answer	my	question.	Why	did	you	seek	to	betray	me?’
Kamran’s	eyes	–	green	as	their	father	Babur ’s	had	been	–	were	slits	as	he	looked	up	at	Humayun	on
his	glittering	throne.	‘The	plot	was	my	idea	–	punish	me,	not	them.	It	was	the	only	way	to	redress	the
wrong	done	to	us.	As	you	yourself	said,	we	are	all	Babur ’s	sons.	Doesn’t	the	blood	of	Timur	flow
through	all	our	veins?	And	through	our	grandmother	Kutlugh	Nigar	the	blood	of	Genghis	Khan	as
well?	 Yet	 we	 have	 been	 left	 with	 nothing	 except	 to	 be	 your	 lackeys,	 to	 be	 sent	 hither	 and	 thither

according	to	your	whims.	You	treat	us	as	slaves,	not	princes.’
‘And	you	behave	–	all	of	you,	not	just	you,	Kamran	–	like	common	criminals,	not	brothers.	Where
is	 your	 sense	 of	 loyalty	 to	 our	 dynasty,	 if	 not	 to	 me?’	 Glancing	 up	 at	 an	 intricately	 carved	 wooden
grille	set	high	in	the	wall	to	the	right	of	his	throne,	Humayun	caught	the	flash	of	a	dark	eye.	Doubtless
Khanzada	and	probably	his	mother	Maham	were	observing	him	from	the	little	gallery	behind	it	where
the	 royal	 women,	 unseen	 themselves,	 could	 watch	 and	 listen	 to	 the	 business	 of	 the	 court.	 Perhaps
Gulrukh	and	Dildar	were	also	there,	waiting	in	trembling	anticipation	for	the	sentence	he	was	about	to
pronounce	on	their	sons.
But	now	that	the	moment	had	come,	Humayun	felt	strangely	reluctant.	Even	half	an	hour	ago	he	had
been	 so	 certain	 what	 he	 would	 do	 –	 ruthless	 as	 Timur,	 he	 would	 order	 Kamran’s	 and	 Askari’s
immediate	execution	and	send	Hindal	to	perpetual	imprisonment	in	some	far-off	fortress.	Yet	looking
down	 at	 the	 three	 of	 them	 –	 Kamran	 so	 arrogant	 and	 defiant,	 Askari	 and	 young	 Hindal	 plainly
terrified	–	Humayun	felt	his	anger	ebbing.	Their	father	had	been	dead	only	a	few	months,	and	how
could	 he	 ignore	 Babur ’s	 dying	 words?	 Do	 nothing	 against	 your	 brothers,	 however	 much	 you	 think
they	might	deserve	it.	Just	as	in	love-making,	there	was	a	time	to	be	rigorous	and	a	time	to	be	gentle.
Stepping	 down	 from	 his	 throne,	 Humayun	 walked	 slowly	 over	 to	 his	 brothers	 and,	 starting	 with
Kamran,	 embraced	 them.The	 trio	 stood	 before	 him,	 swaying	 slightly,	 expressions	 confused	 as	 they
searched	his	face	for	the	meaning	of	his	actions.	‘It	is	not	fitting	that	we	brothers	should	quarrel.	I	do
not	wish	to	spill	the	blood	of	our	house	into	the	earth	of	this	new	land	of	ours	–	it	would	be	a	bad
omen	for	our	dynasty.	Swear	your	loyalty	to	me	and	you	shall	live.	I	will	also	give	you	provinces	to
govern	which,	though	part	of	the	empire,	you	shall	rule	as	your	own,	subject	only	to	me.’
Around	 him,	 Humayun	 caught	 sounds	 first	 of	 astonishment	 and	 then	 of	 approval	 rising	 from	 his
courtiers	and	commanders,	and	pride	flooded	through	him.	This	was	real	greatness.	This	was	truly
how	 an	 emperor	 should	 act	 –	 crushing	 dissent	 but	 then	 showing	 magnanimity.	 As	 he	 embraced	 his
brothers	a	second	time,	grateful	tears	shimmered	in	Askari’s	and	Hindal’s	eyes.	But	Kamran’s	green
ones	remained	dry,	and	his	expression	was	bleak	and	unfathomable.

Chapter	2
An	Impudent	Enemy
The	 morning	 sun	 was	 glinting	 gold	 on	 the	 breastplates	 of	 the	 two	 tall,	 white-turbaned	 bodyguards
who	 preceded	 Humayun	 across	 the	 courtyard	 of	 the	 red	 sandstone	 Agra	 fort,	 past	 the	 bubbling
fountains	into	the	high-ceilinged	durbar	hall.	Making	his	way	across	the	pillared	hall	which	was	open
to	 the	 cooling	 breezes	 on	 three	 sides,	 and	 moving	 through	 the	 assembled	 ranks	 of	 his	 counsellors
who	prostrated	themselves	in	formal	salutation	at	his	approach,	Humayun	ascended	the	marble	dais	in
the	 centre	 of	 the	 room.	 Here,	 gathering	 his	 green	 silk	 robes	 around	 him,	 he	 seated	 himself	 on	 his
gilded,	high-backed	throne.	The	two	guards,	hands	on	their	swords,	positioned	themselves	just	behind
the	throne,	one	at	either	side.
Humayun	 signalled	 his	 advisers	 to	 rise.	 ‘You	 know	 why	 I	 have	 called	 you	 together	 today	 –	 to
discuss	 the	 presumptuous	 posturings	 of	 Sultan	 Bahadur	 Shah.	 Not	 content	 with	 his	 rich	 lands	 of
Gujarat	 to	 our	 southwest,	 he	 gave	 refuge	 to	 the	 sons	 of	 Ibrahim	 Lodi,	 Sultan	 of	 Delhi,	 whom	 my
father	 and	 I	 with	 your	 magnificent	 help	 deposed.	 Proclaiming	 his	 family	 ties	 to	 them,	 he	 began
assembling	 allies	 around	 him.	 His	 ambassadors	 insinuated	 to	 the	 Rajputs	 and	 the	 Afghan	 clans	 that
our	empire	is	more	illusion	than	reality.	He	derided	it	for	being	only	two	hundred	miles	wide	even
though	it	extends	a	thousand	miles	from	the	Khyber.	They	dismiss	us	as	mere	barbarian	raiders	whose
rule	will	be	as	easily	blown	away	as	the	morning	mist.
‘All	this	we	knew	and	held	as	beneath	our	contempt	but	this	morning	a	messenger	–	exhausted	by
riding	through	the	night	–	brought	news	that	one	of	Bahadur	Shah’s	armies,	led	by	the	Lodi	pretender
Tartar	 Khan,	 has	 raided	 across	 our	 borders.	 Scarcely	 eighty	 miles	 west	 of	 Agra,	 they	 captured	 a
caravan	 bearing	 tribute	 from	 one	 of	 our	 Rajput	 vassals.	 Of	 this	 much	 I	 am	 certain.	 We	 will	 not
tolerate	such	disrespect.	We	must	and	will	punish	the	sultan	severely.	What	I	have	summoned	you	here
to	discuss	is	not	whether	we	should	crush	him,	but	how	best	to	do	it.’	Humayun	paused	and	looked
around	at	his	counsellors	before	continuing.
Suleiman	Mirza,	a	cousin	of	Humayun	and	general	of	his	cavalry,	was	the	first	to	speak.	‘Bahadur
Shah	 will	 not	 be	 easy	 to	 defeat.	 To	 do	 so	 we	 must	 look	 to	 our	 strengths.	 Unlike	 when	 your	 father
conquered	 Delhi,	 we	 have	 more	 men,	 horses	 and	 elephants	 than	 our	 enemy.	 The	 animals	 are	 well
trained	and	the	soldiers	loyal.The	prospect	of	the	booty	from	Bahadur	Shah’s	overflowing	vaults	will
reinforce	 their	 appetite	 for	 battle.	 But	 there	 is	 another	 difference	 from	 when	 the	 Moghuls	 came	 to
Hindustan.	This	time,	both	sides	will	have	cannon	and	matchlock	muskets	–	not	just	us.	The	sultan	has
used	the	taxes	he	imposes	on	the	pilgrims	setting	out	across	the	high	sea	on	the	haj	to	Mecca	and	on
the	 traders	 from	 distant	 lands	 who	 throng	 his	 ports	 of	 Cambay	 and	 Surat	 to	 buy	 many	 cannon	 and
matchlocks	and	to	entice	experienced	Ottoman	armourers	to	work	in	his	foundries.	We	can	no	longer
rely	on	the	very	presence	of	our	artillerymen	to	turn	every	battle	for	us.	They	will	still	be	important,
but	we	need	to	change	our	tactics	once	more.’
‘Yes,	 easily	 enough	 said,	 but	 what	 does	 it	 mean	 in	 practice?’	 asked	 Baba	 Yasaval,	 tugging	 at	 his
tassel	of	hair.

‘Combine	 the	 tactics	 of	 His	 Majesty’s	 father	 Babur	 in	 his	 youth	 with	 those	 of	 his	 last	 battles,’
answered	Suleiman	Mirza.	‘Send	fast	raiding	parties	of	cavalry	and	mounted	archers	into	Gujarat	to
hit	 Bahadur	 Shah’s	 forces	 wherever	 they	 find	 them	 and	 then	 disappear	 again	 long	 before	 he	 can
concentrate	his	armies	against	them.	Leave	him	guessing	where	our	main	attack	will	come	but	all	the
time	advance	our	main	column	with	the	artillery	and	elephants	steadily	into	his	territory.’
Though	most	of	Humayun’s	counsellors	nodded,	Baba	Yasaval	asked,	‘But	what	should	our	main
army’s	specific	objective	be?’
‘Why	 not	 the	 fortress	 of	 Champnir,	 deep	 in	 the	 forests	 of	 Gujarat?’	 said	 Humayun.	 ‘It	 contains
Bahadur ’s	greatest	royal	treasury.	He	will	not	feel	able	to	yield	it	to	us.	He	will	be	forced	to	attack	to
relieve	it	from	our	besiegers.’
‘Yes,	but	how	will	we	combat	his	threat	to	the	rear	of	our	besieging	force?’	said	Suleiman	Mirza.
This	time	it	was	Baba	Yasaval	who	answered,	eyes	now	gleaming	at	the	thought	of	action.	‘We	have
the	advantage	of	time.	We	can	dig	in	our	guns	so	they	can	fire	at	both	the	fortress	and	the	relieving
columns,	and	we	can	position	our	armies	to	fight	a	battle	on	two	sides.	If	Bahadur	Shah	tries	to	lift	the
siege	he’ll	get	a	nasty	surprise.’
‘You	speak	soundly,’	said	Humayun.	‘I	will	myself	lead	the	first	of	the	raiding	parties	to	cross	into
Gujarat.	If	Bahadur	Shah	hears	–	as	he	will	–	that	I	am	in	the	field	myself,	it	may	confuse	him	further
as	to	our	real	objectives.	Suleiman	Mirza,	I	look	to	you	and	Baba	Yasaval	to	make	the	preparations.
The	council	is	now	dismissed.’
With	that	Humayun	rose	and	with	his	two	bodyguards	once	more	in	front	of	him	slowly	made	his
way	back	across	the	courtyard	to	his	quarters.	Once	there	he	asked	Jauhar,	his	cup-bearer	and	most
trusted	 attendant	 –	 a	 tall,	 fine-featured	 youth	 whose	 father	 had	 been	 one	 of	 the	 commanders	 of
Babur ’s	bodyguard	–	to	summon	his	astrologers	to	join	him	in	an	hour	or	so	to	calculate	the	most
auspicious	time	to	begin	his	campaign.	His	battle	plan	had	been	decided	quickly.	The	reassurance	that
he	had	the	support	of	the	astrologers’	star	charts	and	tabulations	in	the	timing	of	his	invasion	would
be	valuable	to	his	own	confidence	as	he	began	his	first	campaign	as	emperor	as	well	as	to	the	morale
of	his	army.
In	the	meantime	he	would	visit	his	aunt	Khanzada	to	seek	her	wise	advice	on	his	choice	of	officers
for	his	expedition	and,	even	more	important,	to	discuss	with	her	his	views	on	another	question.	Was	it
safe	while	he	was	away	on	campaign	to	leave	his	half-brothers	in	their	various	provinces	–	Kamran	to
the	northwest	in	the	Punjab,	Askari	in	Jaunpur	to	the	east	and	Hindal	to	the	west	in	Alwar?	Might	they
use	the	opportunity	to	rise	against	him?	Should	he	give	them	commands	in	his	army	and	take	them
with	him	so	he	could	keep	an	eye	on	them?
The	reports	reaching	him	from	their	provinces	gave	no	outward	reason	for	concern,	particularly
in	 the	 case	 of	 Hindal	 and	 Askari	 who	 regularly	 wrote	 back	 in	 punctilious	 detail	 on	 their
administration	and	remitted	their	taxes	in	full,	sometimes	even	ahead	of	time.	Kamran	too	sent	in	the
due	proportion	of	his	province’s	revenues,	even	if	his	reports	were	infrequent	and	brief.	Occasionally
an	official,	dissatisfied	with	his	progress	at	Humayun’s	court,	had	gone	to	Kamran’s	province	to	try
his	luck	there.	Sometimes	there	had	been	rumours	that	Kamran	had	been	assembling	a	larger	army
than	he	strictly	needed	for	his	province,	but	these	had	usually	proved	groundless	or	justified	by	the
need	to	put	down	some	petty	rebel	or	other.
Yet	 Humayun	 couldn’t	 quite	 rid	 himself	 of	 the	 feeling	 that	 Kamran	 would	 not	 abandon	 his
ambitions	 so	 easily	 and	 might	 only	 be	 biding	 his	 time,	 ready	 to	 exploit	 for	 his	 own	 benefit	 any
misfortune	 of	 Humayun’s.	 So	 be	 it.	 He	 would	 ensure	 he	 suffered	 none	 to	 allow	 Kamran	 such	 an
opportunity.	In	any	case,	perhaps	he	had	misjudged	Kamran	and,	together	with	Hindal	and	Askari,	he

had	learned	his	lesson	and	was	grateful	as	he	should	be	for	Humayun’s	mercy.	He	hoped	it	was	so.
Just	in	case	it	was	not,	he	needn’t	move	against	Bahadur	Shah	until	his	grandfather	Baisanghar	was
back	in	Agra.	He	and	Humayun’s	vizier	Kasim	had	after	their	return	from	Kabul	set	off	on	a	tour	of
inspection	 of	 the	 imperial	 treasury	 in	 Delhi	 from	 which	 they	 would	 return	 in	 a	 few	 days.	 Then
Humayun	would	appoint	Baisanghar	regent	in	his	absence.	He	could	safely	trust	his	grandfather	–	and
Khanzada	and	Kasim	too	–	to	keep	an	eye	on	his	troublesome	half-brothers.
They	would	also	watch	over	his	mother.	Since	Babur ’s	death	Maham	seemed	to	have	lost	the	little
interest	 she’d	 ever	 had	 in	 the	 affairs	 of	 the	 world.	 Though	 proud	 her	 son	 was	 emperor,	 she	 never
questioned	him	about	his	plans	or	offered	him	advice	as	Khanzada	did.	When	he	was	with	her,	all	she
did	was	speak	longingly	of	the	past.	But	perhaps,	in	time,	she	would	see	that	it	was	the	future	that	must
occupy	him	now.

Humayun	 looked	 down	 from	 a	 sandstone	 escarpment	 on	 to	 a	 long	 column	 of	 Bahadur	 Shah’s	 men
who,	oblivious	of	his	presence,	were	throwing	up	clouds	of	dust	as	they	snaked	along	the	riverbank
four	hundred	feet	below.	At	this	time	of	year	–	early	March,	two	months	after	he	had	left	Agra	–	the
river	was	mostly	dry	with	only	a	few	pools	of	water	remaining	in	the	deepest	parts	of	its	bed.	Along
the	 banks	 an	 occasional	 palm	 tree	 provided	 a	 touch	 of	 green.	 Humayun	 could	 see	 squadrons	 of
cavalry	to	the	front	and	rear	of	the	column	with	divisions	of	infantry	and	a	large	baggage	train	in	its
middle.
Unable	to	suppress	a	smile	of	triumph,	Humayun	turned	in	his	saddle	to	speak	to	Jauhar,	who	was
accompanying	him	on	the	campaign	as	one	of	his	qorchis	–	his	squires.	‘We	have	them,	Jauhar.	Our
scouts	have	done	well	in	gathering	information	and	leading	us	here.	The	Gujaratis	have	no	suspicion
of	our	presence.	Now	gallop	back	the	mile	to	where	we	left	the	rest	of	our	men.	Order	them	to	ride
along	the	top	of	the	escarpment,	keeping	far	enough	from	the	rim	to	avoid	being	seen	from	below,
until	they	reach	that	point	a	mile	or	so	ahead	where	the	slope	becomes	gentle	enough	for	us	to	swoop
down	to	attack	our	enemies.	I	and	my	bodyguard	will	meet	them	there.’
Jauhar	nodded	and	moved	off.	As	Humayun	turned	with	his	bodyguard	back	from	the	lip	to	make
his	own	way	to	the	rendezvous	point,	he	felt	the	same	mixture	of	apprehension	and	excitement	as	he
always	had	before	battles,	but	also	a	greater	weight	of	responsibility	than	ever	before.	Previously	his
father,	 even	 if	 not	 present	 on	 the	 immediate	 battlefield,	 had	 approved	 the	 overall	 plan	 of	 campaign
and	it	had	been	his	father ’s	throne	–	not	his	own	–	that	had	been	at	stake.	The	thought	caused	a	cold
shiver	 to	 run	 through	 Humayun	 and	 he	 halted	 his	 men	 for	 a	 moment.	 Was	 he	 sure	 –	 as	 sure	 as	 he
could	 be	 –	 that	 his	 plan	 was	 a	 good	 one	 –	 that	 he	 had	 spent	 enough	 time	 checking	 and	 re-checking
each	detail	to	leave	as	little	as	possible	to	chance?	As	he	pondered	this,	he	saw	two	large	brown	hawks
soar	seemingly	effortlessly	from	beneath	the	escarpment	high	into	the	cloudless	blue	sky	as	the	hot
air	bore	them	upward	on	outstretched	wings.	Suddenly	he	remembered	the	eagles	he	had	seen	at	the
battle	of	Panipat	which	had	proved	such	a	favourable	omen.	Surely	these	birds	would	prove	so	too	as
he	struck	the	first	blow	in	his	conquest	of	Gujarat.
Throwing	off	his	doubts	and	uncertainties,	Humayun	reached	the	appointed	meeting	place	for	the
rest	of	his	forces.	As	soon	as	they	were	all	assembled,	Humayun	quickly	gave	orders	for	the	attack	to

be	conducted	in	two	waves.The	first,	after	galloping	down	the	steep	slope,	would	envelop	the	rear	of
the	enemy	column.The	second	would	encircle	the	vanguard,	exploiting	its	confusion	as	it	halted	and
tried	 to	 turn	 round	 –	 as	 it	 would	 be	 bound	 to	 do	 –	 to	 assist	 the	 rear.	 Drawing	 his	 father ’s	 sword
Alamgir,	 Humayun	 kissed	 its	 jewelled	 hilt	 and	 shouted	 to	 his	 men,	 ‘Fill	 your	 minds	 with	 warrior
spirit	and	your	lungs	with	heroes’	breath.	We	fight	to	defend	our	newly	won	lands.	Let	us	prove	to
these	presumptuous	upstarts	that	we	have	not	lost	our	ancient	reputation	for	courage.’	Then,	waving
his	sword	above	his	head,	Humayun	signalled	the	charge	and	with	his	bodyguard	about	him	kicked
his	black	stallion	down	the	slope	to	the	attack.
As	they	raced	down	the	hill,	stones	and	red	dust	flying	around	them,	he	could	see	in	front	of	him
the	Gujarati	column	halt	as	the	men	turned	in	his	direction	to	see	what	the	noise	was.Taken	completely
by	surprise	the	Gujaratis	hesitated	and	then	began	to	react	only	slowly	as	if	for	them	time	was	almost
standing	still,	fumbling	for	their	weapons	and	looking	around	in	panic	for	their	officers	to	see	what
their	orders	were.	One	black-bearded	man	was	quicker	than	the	others,	dismounting	and	trying	to	pull
his	musket	from	its	thick	cloth	bag	tied	to	his	saddle.
Humayun	turned	his	horse	towards	the	musketeer	and,	gripping	his	sword	in	his	right	hand,	ducked
low	to	his	horse’s	neck	as	he	urged	his	mount	on,	all	thoughts	of	command	and	destiny	banished	from
his	mind	by	the	visceral	instinct	to	survive,	to	kill	or	be	killed.	Within	moments	he	was	on	the	man,
who	was	still	struggling	to	prime	his	musket.	Humayun	slashed	at	his	bearded	face	and	down	he	went,
blood	pouring	from	his	wound,	beneath	the	hooves	of	the	attacking	cavalry.	Humayun	was	well	into
the	 enemy	 column	 now,	 cutting	 and	 slashing	 as	 he	 rode.	 Suddenly	 he	 was	 through,	 pulling	 up	 his
snorting,	panting	horse	as	his	men	rallied	around	him.
Immediately	 he	 had	 enough	 men,	 Humayun	 charged	 back	 into	 the	 column	 a	 second	 time.	 A	 tall
Gujarati	cut	at	him	with	his	curved	sword,	striking	his	breastplate	and	knocking	Humayun	back	in	the
saddle.As	 Humayun	 struggled	 to	 control	 his	 rearing	 horse,	 the	 Gujarati	 rode	 at	 him	 again	 and,
overeager	to	finish	his	victim	off,	aimed	a	swinging	sword	cut	at	Humayun’s	head.	Humayun	reacted
instinctively,	ducking	under	the	blade	which	hissed	through	the	air	just	above	his	helmet.	Before	the
Gujarati	could	recover,	Humayun	quickly	thrust	Alamgir	deep	into	his	abdomen.	As	the	man	dropped
his	 sword	 and	 clutched	 the	 wound,	 Humayun	 coolly	 and	 deliberately	 struck	 at	 the	 back	 of	 his
opponent’s	neck,	almost	severing	his	head	from	his	shoulders.
Glancing	 about	 him,	 Humayun	 saw	 through	 the	 billowing	 red	 dust	 that	 the	 Gujarati	 column	 was
disintegrating.	 Some	 of	 the	 horsemen	 were	 galloping	 away	 in	 panic.	 Others	 in	 the	 middle	 of	 the
column	 were,	 however,	 offering	 stouter	 resistance,	 defending	 the	 wagons	 which	 presumably
contained	the	baggage	and	the	cannon.	Humayun	knew	that	even	if	he	captured	them,	he	would	not	be
able	to	carry	off	any	cannon	because	they	would	slow	down	his	force	whose	entire	purpose	was	fast
raiding.	However,	he	could	disable	them.	With	the	blood	of	battle	thumping	in	his	veins	and	yelling	to
his	trumpeter	to	sound	the	order	to	follow	him,	Humayun	immediately	charged	towards	the	baggage
wagons.
Suddenly	he	heard	the	crack	of	a	musket	–	then	of	another.	Some	of	the	Gujarati	musketeers	had
got	 their	 weapons	 into	 operation	 and	 were	 firing	 from	 the	 cover	 of	 the	 baggage	 carts.	 One	 of	 the
horses	galloping	ten	yards	from	Humayun	was	hit,	falling	headfirst	into	the	dust	and	catapulting	its
rider	 to	 the	 ground	 where	 he	 lay	 twitching	 a	 moment	 before	 the	 horses	 of	 his	 comrades	 following
behind	kicked	and	tossed	him	beneath	their	hooves,	extinguishing	any	life	lingering	in	his	body.
Humayun	 knew	 that	 he	 must	 reach	 the	 wagons	 before	 the	 musketeers	 could	 reload.	 Waving
Alamgir	once	more,	he	kicked	his	horse	on	and	almost	immediately	was	among	the	carts.	He	cut	at
one	musketeer	who	was	endeavouring	with	shaking	hands	to	ram	the	metal	ball	down	into	the	long

barrel	of	his	musket	with	a	steel	rod.	Struck	across	his	face,	the	man	collapsed,	dropping	his	weapon.
The	enemy	had	had	no	time	to	pull	the	wagons	into	any	defensive	formations	and	so	Humayun’s	men,
who	 had	 quickly	 joined	 him,	 found	 it	 easy	 to	 surround	 and	 subdue	 the	 defenders	 of	 individual
wagons.	More	of	the	Gujarati	cavalry	galloped	away	and	the	infantry	and	camp	followers	were	also
fleeing	as	fast	as	they	could.
Resistance	 was	 at	 an	 end	 –	 at	 least	 for	 the	 present.	 However,	 Humayun	 knew	 that	 his	 force	 was
considerably	outnumbered	and	that	when	the	Gujarati	officers	realised	this,	they	would	try	to	regroup
and	attack	him.	Therefore	there	was	no	time	to	waste.	Humayun	ordered	a	detachment	of	his	cavalry
to	pursue	the	fugitives,	cutting	down	as	many	as	they	could	but	riding	no	more	than	a	couple	of	miles
before	 returning	 to	 form	 a	 loose	 defensive	 perimeter.	 He	 gestured	 to	 other	 men	 to	 investigate	 the
contents	of	the	wagons.	They	went	at	it	with	a	will,	throwing	off	the	heavy	jute	covers	to	reveal	six
medium-sized	cannon	and	their	powder	and	shot	as	well	as	bundles	of	new	spears	and	five	boxes	of
muskets.
‘We’ll	take	all	the	muskets.	Empty	the	boxes.	Strap	bundles	of	the	muskets	to	the	saddles	of	some	of
the	spare	horses.	Fill	the	cannon	barrels	with	as	many	linen	bags	of	powder	as	they	will	take	and	then
run	a	trail	of	powder	along	the	ground	to	those	rocks	over	there.	We’ll	ignite	the	powder	from	behind
them,’	Humayun	said.
A	quarter	of	an	hour	later	the	work	was	complete.	Humayun	despatched	most	of	his	men	to	a	safe
distance	but	remained	with	a	few	of	his	bodyguards	to	oversee	the	destruction.	He	gave	the	honour	of
firing	the	powder	to	a	tall	young	Badakshani	who,	taking	the	flint	box,	struggled	nervously	to	get	a
spark.When	 eventually	 he	 succeeded,	 the	 powder	 flame	 went	 sputtering	 across	 the	 ground.	 For	 a
moment	it	seemed	that	it	was	going	to	die	as	it	skirted	a	small	rock	but	then	it	was	away	again.	Almost
immediately	there	was	a	massive	bang	followed	closely	by	five	others.The	charges	had	exploded	in
each	of	the	cannon	barrels.
When	the	debris	and	dust	had	settled	Humayun,	still	half	deafened	by	the	blast,	could	see	that	four
of	the	barrels	were	split	and	peeled	back,	much	like	the	skin	of	a	banana.	Another	had	disintegrated
completely.	The	barrel	of	the	sixth	was	cracked	–	just	enough,	Humayun	thought,	to	render	it	useless.
His	 men	 had	 soon	 returned	 and	 were	 searching	 the	 remaining	 baggage	 wagons	 for	 booty.	 One	 had
found	 some	 silks,	 another	 was	 jamming	 his	 dagger	 into	 the	 lock	 of	 a	 casket,	 trying	 to	 force	 it	 in
search	of	jewels.
Then	 Humayun	 saw	 one	 of	 the	 cavalrymen	 he	 had	 detached	 to	 form	 the	 perimeter	 defence
galloping	towards	him.	‘The	Gujaratis	have	regrouped,	Majesty.	They	are	forming	up	to	attack,	now
they	have	seen	how	few	we	are.’
‘We	 must	 be	 away.	 Trumpeter,	 sound	 the	 retreat.	 We’ll	 go	 back	 up	 the	 escarpment.	 They	 won’t
follow.	They’ll	know	it	would	be	death	to	give	us	the	opportunity	to	attack	them	as	they	struggle	up.’
Twenty	minutes	later,	Humayun	looked	down	from	the	sandstone	escarpment	on	to	the	wreckage	of
the	column	around	which	the	Gujaratis	were	now	milling.	His	men	had	got	away	safely	except	for	a
foolish	few	who,	mesmerised	by	the	prospect	of	loot,	had	lingered	too	long	investigating	the	contents
of	the	baggage	wagons.	Among	them,	Humayun	reflected	sadly,	had	been	the	young	Badakshani	who
had	been	brought	down	by	an	arrow	in	the	back	as	he	galloped	too	late	for	the	escarpment.	The	bolt
of	embroidered	pink	silk	tied	to	his	saddle	had	unravelled,	streaming	out	behind	his	riderless	horse.

There	it	was	–	beyond	the	tall	palm	trees	and	the	pale	tangerine	sand	the	glinting	ocean	reflecting	the
light	 of	 the	 midday	 sun	 with	 such	 an	 intensity	 that	 Humayun	 was	 forced	 to	 shield	 his	 eyes	 with	 his
hand.	 After	 his	 successful	 raid	 on	 the	 enemy	 column	 he	 had	 despatched	 half	 his	 force	 of	 three
thousand	men	back	to	the	main	body	of	his	army,	which	was	beginning	its	slow	advance	from	Moghul
territories	towards	the	jungle	fortress	of	Champnir	with	all	the	equipment	and	provisions	required	for
a	siege.
Humayun	himself,	together	with	a	picked	body	of	fifteen	hundred	horsemen,	had	penetrated	even
further	into	Gujarat,	disrupting	and	defeating	enemies	wherever	he	found	them.	He	had	succeeded,	he
was	 sure,	 in	 leaving	 them	 uncertain	 and	 confused	 as	 to	 the	 main	 thrust	 of	 his	 army,	 just	 as	 he	 had
planned.	His	quest	for	a	caravan	reported	by	captured	Gujaratis	to	be	carrying	military	supplies	and
trade	goods	towards	the	port	of	Cambay	had	brought	him	to	the	sea.	Humayun	was	glad	that	it	had.	He
called	Jauhar	to	his	side.	‘Pass	the	order	that	we	will	rest	and	refresh	ourselves	beneath	the	shade	of
the	palms	during	the	midday	heat	while	our	scouts	search	for	the	caravan.	It	cannot	be	far	off	now.
Indeed,	from	what	we	learn	Cambay	itself	should	be	no	more	than	ten	miles	or	so	northwest	up	the
coast.	Give	orders	for	pickets	and	sentries	to	be	posted	so	that	we	cannot	be	taken	by	surprise.’
As	Jauhar	turned	with	the	message,	Humayun	nudged	his	black	horse	forward	through	the	palms,
whose	long,	pointed,	dark	green	leaves	were	rustling	in	the	breeze	coming	off	the	sea,	and	on	into	the
soft	sand.	Here,	Humayun	jumped	down.	Stopping	only	to	discard	his	boots,	he	walked	out	into	the
sea,	conscious	that	he	was	the	first	of	his	family	ever	to	do	so.The	water	slapping	against	his	lower
calves	 was	 refreshingly	 cool.	 Again	 shielding	 his	 eyes,	 he	 gazed	 out	 to	 the	 glittering,	 sparkling
horizon.	There	he	thought	he	could	make	out	the	shape	of	a	ship	–	presumably	one	of	those	trading
with	Cambay.What	kinds	of	goods	were	they	carrying?	What	kind	of	people?	What	else	lay	beyond
the	horizon,	beyond	even	Arabia	and	the	holy	cities?	Was	there	new	knowledge	to	be	gleaned	there?
Were	there	new	enemies	or	were	there	simply	barren	lands	or	an	infinity	of	ocean?
A	shout	from	Jauhar	interrupted	Humayun’s	solitary	contemplation.	‘Majesty,	your	officers	wish	to
consult	with	you.	Will	you	take	food	with	them?	You’ve	been	watching	the	sea	for	some	time	and	the
waters	 are	 rising	 around	 you.’	 It	 was	 true.	 The	 little	 waves	 were	 now	 splashing	 Humayun’s	 knees
before	retreating.	Reluctantly	he	turned	his	mind	away	from	the	metaphysical	speculations	he	found
so	beguiling	to	present-day	practicalities	and	made	his	way	to	where	the	officers	waited,	sitting	crosslegged	under	a	scarlet	awning	beneath	the	palms.
Ten	 minutes	 later,	 his	 chief	 scout	 Ahmed	 Khan,	 a	 wiry	 turbaned	 man	 of	 about	 thirty	 from	 the
mountains	of	Ghazni,	south	of	Kabul,	was	standing	before	him,	sweat	running	from	his	brow	down
his	cheeks	into	his	thin,	brown	beard.	‘The	caravan	is	no	more	than	five	miles	off,	travelling	along	a
road	about	a	quarter	of	a	mile	inland	on	the	other	side	of	that	thick	belt	of	palms	fringing	the	coast.	It
is	about	four	miles	from	the	town	of	Cambay,	which	is	hidden	from	our	view	by	that	low	promontory
over	there.’
‘We	will	ride	along	the	beach	itself	on	the	other	side	of	the	palms	and	ambush	them	as	they	reach
Cambay.	 God	 willing,	 we	 may	 even	 be	 able	 to	 force	 our	 way	 into	 the	 port	 if	 the	 gates	 are	 opened
ready	for	the	caravan’s	entry.’
Only	 five	 minutes	 later,	 Humayun	 was	 galloping	 along	 the	 edge	 of	 the	 sand	 with	 his	 bodyguard
grouped	close	around	him.	In	less	than	an	hour	they	had	crossed	the	rocky	promontory	and	from	the
continuing	cover	of	the	palms	Humayun	could	see	the	masts	and	sails	of	the	ships	lying	in	the	port	of
Cambay	or	at	anchor	outside	it.	The	caravan,	including	loaded,	swaying	camels	and	pack	elephants	as
well	 as	 mules	 and	 donkeys,	 was	 trudging	 slowly	 towards	 the	 open	 main	 gate	 in	 the	 mud	 wall
surrounding	 the	 settlement.	 The	 wall	 itself	 did	 not	 look	 too	 high	 –	 perhaps	 only	 double	 a	 man’s

height.	 The	 caravan’s	 escort,	 about	 four	 hundred	 men	 in	 total,	 were	 riding	 on	 either	 side	 of	 it	 but
appeared	 indolent,	 heads	 bowed	 in	 the	 midday	 heat	 with	 their	 swords	 in	 their	 scabbards	 and	 their
shields	on	their	backs.
Riding	back	to	the	main	body	of	his	men,	Humayun	yelled,	‘Charge	now.	Take	them	by	surprise.
Try	 to	 panic	 the	 camels	 and	 elephants.That	 should	 disrupt	 the	 Gujarati	 escort.’	 Even	 as	 he	 spoke,
Humayun	kicked	on	his	black	horse,	which	was	already	flecked	with	creamy	sweat,	and	soon	he	was
galloping	 full	 tilt	 with	 his	 men	 out	 through	 the	 palms,	 over	 the	 half	 a	 mile	 of	 stony,	 sandy	 ground
separating	 him	 from	 the	 caravan	 and	 the	 port’s	 gate.	 At	 his	 command,	 some	 of	 his	 most	 expert
archers	 took	 their	 reins	 in	 their	 teeth	 and	 standing	 in	 their	 stirrups	 loosed	 off	 a	 volley	 of	 arrows
towards	 the	 caravan	 just	 as	 its	 escort	 realised	 that	 they	 were	 under	 attack.	 Some	 of	 the	 arrows
wounded	 one	 of	 the	 elephants	 which	 with	 several	 shafts	 embedded	 in	 its	 leathery	 skin	 turned,
trumpeting	in	pain,	across	the	path	of	some	of	its	fellows,	scattering	them.
A	camel	fell	with	a	low	snort	of	pain,	shedding	its	load	as	it	subsided	to	the	sand,	its	large,	padded
feet	flailing	futilely	in	the	air.	Another,	with	a	black-feathered	arrow	piercing	its	long	neck,	galloped
off	towards	the	sea.	Almost	immediately,	Humayun	and	his	men	were	riding	through	the	thin	line	of
the	escort,	slashing	at	them	as	they	went.	Some	Gujaratis	fell	under	the	first	weight	of	the	charge.	A
few	were	cut	down	as	they	tried	to	rein	in	their	horses	and	turn	to	face	the	unexpected	onslaught.	Most
simply	bent	low	to	their	horses’	necks	and	urged	the	beasts	towards	the	shelter	of	the	still	open	gates
of	Cambay.
Humayun	and	his	bodyguard	followed.	Humayun	galloped	as	hard	as	he	could	after	what	looked
like	 an	 officer	 who	 was	 fleeing	 with	 two	 of	 his	 men.	 Hearing	 Humayun	 close	 behind,	 the	 officer
turned	 and	 seeing	 his	 danger	 tried	 to	 grab	 his	 shield	 to	 protect	 himself.	 Before	 he	 could	 do	 so,
Humayun’s	sharp	sword	cut	deep	into	his	thick,	muscular	neck	just	above	his	chain	mail	coat	and	he
fell,	rolled	over	several	times	and	was	still.
In	 moments,	 Humayun	 was	 in	 the	 gateway	 to	 Cambay.	 Hauling	 his	 horse	 round	 to	 avoid	 an
overturned	table	from	which	some	frightened	tax	or	customs	officials	must	have	fled	only	moments
earlier,	he	was	soon	out	into	the	small	square	behind	the	gatehouse.	Here	it	seemed	a	market	had	been
in	 full	 swing.	 The	 stalls	 had	 been	 quickly	 abandoned,	 bags	 of	 bright-coloured	 spices	 pushed	 to	 the
dust	in	panic,	corn	spilled	to	the	ground	where	it	mingled	with	orange	lentils	and	rivers	of	milk	from
an	overturned	barrel.	There	was	no	sign	of	soldiers.	Like	the	caravan’s	escort,	Cambay’s	defenders
seemed	to	have	no	appetite	for	a	fight.	The	few	stallholders	that	were	left	–	mostly	white-bearded	old
men	or	dark-clad	women	–	were	prostrating	themselves	faces	to	the	sand	before	their	attackers.
‘Find	the	barracks.	Imprison	any	soldiers	you	find	there.	Take	what	you	can	from	the	warehouses
and	 ships.	 Burn	 the	 rest.	 Don’t	 overburden	 yourselves.	 We	 must	 depart	 before	 sundown.	 When	 they
learn	 of	 our	 attack	 on	 Cambay,	 the	 Gujaratis	 will	 be	 alarmed	 enough	 and	 uncertain	 enough	 of	 our
whereabouts	to	feel	unable	to	concentrate	their	forces	when	they	hear	of	the	threat	to	Champnir.	We
ourselves	 must	 hasten	 to	 rejoin	 our	 main	 column	 attacking	 that	 fort.	 It	 is	 there	 we	 will	 win	 the
decisive	victory	that	will	make	Gujarat	ours.’

Chapter	3
The	Spoils	of	War
‘Jauhar,	 bring	 me	 some	 of	 that	 lime	 juice	 and	 water	 –	 what	 do	 the	 Hindus	 call	 it?	 Nimbu	 pani?	 It’s
refreshing	in	this	heat.’	Humayun	was	standing	in	his	large	scarlet	command	tent	in	the	middle	of	his
fortified	 encampment	 outside	 the	 fortress	 of	 Champnir.	 Through	 the	 raised	 flaps,	 he	 could	 see	 its
massive	stone	bulk	at	one	end	of	a	two-mile-long	rocky	outcrop	which	rose	above	the	scrubby	jungle
trees	whose	leaves	were	turning	brown	and	gold	as	the	summer	heat	dried	them.
Humayun	 had	 joined	 the	 siege	 six	 weeks	 ago.	 As	 he	 had	 first	 discussed	 with	 his	 council,	 his
officers	had	fortified	their	own	position	with	barricades	and	cannon	on	both	sides	so	that	they	could
not	 only	 beat	 off	 any	 sorties	 by	 the	 besieged	 but	 also	 repulse	 the	 relieving	 force	 they	 had	 been	 so
certain	would	arrive.	It	hadn’t	yet	and	scouts	still	reported	no	sign	of	its	approach.	Bahadur	Shah	was
said	to	be	in	the	highlands	on	the	southern	border	of	his	lands.	Perhaps	he	trusted	in	the	strength	of	the
fortress	and	its	garrison	as	sufficient	to	see	off	Humayun	and	his	army.
If	 so,	 he’d	 been	 right	 so	 far,	 Humayun	 mused.	 He	 and	 his	 commanders	 had	 tried	 everything	 but
without	 success.	 Their	 cannon	 had	 pounded	 the	 thick	 stone	 walls,	 but	 many	 of	 the	 artillerymen	 had
been	 picked	 off	 from	 the	 fortress’s	 battlements	 as	 they	 struggled	 to	 man	 the	 guns.	 Even	 on	 the	 one
occasion	when	the	gunners	had	succeeded	in	breaching	a	small	portion	of	the	walls,	the	Gujaratis	had
shot	down	Humayun’s	men	with	their	muskets	as	they	tried	to	scramble	through	and	over	the	rubble.
Those	who	had	survived	to	struggle	back	had	reported	there	was	an	inner	wall	from	the	protection	of
which	the	Gujaratis	had	been	able	to	fire	their	bullets	and	arrows	to	repulse	them.	At	other	times,	the
Gujarati	cannon,	well	protected	by	stone	embrasures,	had	been	able	to	break	up	frontal	attacks	even
before	the	Moghuls	could	get	close	enough	to	the	walls	to	place	their	scaling	ladders.
Blackened	 and	 bloated	 bodies	 of	 dead	 Moghul	 warriors	 littered	 the	 ground	 before	 the	 fortress
walls	 giving	 off	 the	 sickly-sweet	 smell	 of	 putrescence	 and	 attracting	 clouds	 of	 purply-black	 flies
which	had	multiplied	and	now	clustered	throughout	his	camp.	So	many	men	had	been	killed	in	trying
to	 rescue	 wounded	 comrades	 or	 to	 recover	 the	 bodies	 of	 the	 dead	 that	 Humayun	 had	 had	 to	 forbid
such	attempts	except	under	cover	of	night	and	even	then	there	had	been	more	casualties.
Jauhar ’s	 reappearance	 with	 his	 drink	 broke	 into	 Humayun’s	 thoughts.	 As	 he	 drank	 the	 cooling
liquid	he	looked	out	once	more	and	saw	that	dark	clouds	were	piling	the	afternoon	sky.	They	would
get	 darker	 and	 even	 more	 numerous	 as	 the	 monsoon	 approached.The	 rains	 would	 provide	 the
defenders	with	water	and	make	Humayun’s	attacks	even	more	difficult.	They	might	even	bring	disease
to	his	camp.
‘Jauhar,	when	do	the	local	people	say	the	rains	come	hereabout?’
‘Mid-July,	Majesty.’
Humayun	stood,	his	mind	made	up.	‘We	must	complete	our	business	here	before	then.	Our	frontal
attacks	are	not	working.	We	need	to	find	an	alternative	and	soon.	I	will	go	out	with	the	leaders	of	our
scouts	tomorrow	to	see	if	we	can	identify	any	weaknesses	in	their	defences	the	Gujaratis	may	have
overlooked.’

Humayun	 was	 sweating	 profusely	 beneath	 his	 chain	 mail	 as	 he	 rode	 along	 the	 southern	 side	 of	 the
rocky	outcrop	on	whose	eastern	tip	the	seemingly	impregnable	fort	of	Champnir	stood.	Added	to	his
physical	discomfort	was	a	feeling	of	acute	frustration.	He	and	his	scouts	had	already	spent	five	hot
hours	 in	 a	 fruitless	 reconnaissance	 of	 the	 northern	 side	 and	 were	 already	 over	 halfway	 down	 the
southern.	 Every	 time	 he	 or	 a	 scout	 had	 thought	 they	 had	 spotted	 a	 vulnerable	 point	 where	 his	 men
might	make	an	ascent	it	had	ended	in	an	overhang	impassable	to	climbing	soldiers.	Once	a	scout	had
got	three-quarters	of	the	way	up	a	cleft	in	the	rock	wall	before	he	fell	backwards,	arms	flailing,	when
a	single	musket	shot	cracked	out,	revealing	that	there	was	indeed	a	defensive	post	concealed	in	one	of
the	folds	of	the	cliff.
‘Jauhar,	 give	 me	 some	 water,’	 Humayun	 said,	 wiping	 his	 sweating	 face	 with	 a	 cotton	 cloth.
‘Quickly	boy,’	he	snapped	as	Jauhar	fumbled	at	his	saddlebag.
‘Sorry,	Majesty,	the	ties	are	entangled.’
‘As	quick	as	you	can	then,’	Humayun	said	more	softly,	conscious	that	his	anger	was	inspired	not	by
the	 boy’s	 ineptitude	 but	 his	 own	 frustration	 at	 failing	 to	 locate	 an	 attack	 route.	 ‘We’ll	 dismount	 and
rest	for	a	little	under	the	shade	of	those	trees	over	there	on	that	small	hill.’
Wearily	Humayun	turned	his	horse	towards	the	copse	five	hundred	yards	away.	But	as	he	rode	up
the	 gentle	 slope	 and	 dismounted,	 he	 realised	 that	 the	 higher	 elevation	 and	 a	 new	 direction	 of	 view
gave	a	completely	different	perspective.	He	was	able	to	see	that	above	the	trees	was	a	deep	cleft	in	the
rock	which	seemed	to	run	all	the	way	to	the	top.	Perhaps	a	waterfall	ran	down	it	in	the	monsoon	but	at
the	 moment	 it	 looked	 dry.	 Thirst	 and	 frustration	 forgotten,	 Humayun	 called	 his	 chief	 scout	 Ahmed
Khan	to	him.
‘Do	you	see	that	fissure	over	there?	What	d’you	think?	Could	it	be	passable?’
‘I’m	not	sure,	Majesty,	but	it	looks	promising.	I	will	go	and	investigate.’
‘Before	you	go	make	sure	that	the	rest	of	our	men	are	under	cover	of	the	trees.	We	don’t	want	them
spotted	.	.	.	and	good	luck.’
‘Thank	 you,	 Majesty.’	 Ahmed	 Khan	 took	 a	 pair	 of	 leather	 boots	 from	 his	 saddlebag.	 Their	 thick
soles	had	extra	leather	bands	sewn	across	them	for	better	grip.	Pulling	them	on,	he	set	off	the	halfmile	or	so	to	the	cliff.	After	five	or	ten	minutes	he	was	lost	to	view	in	the	scrubby	bush	and	straggling
trees.	Then	Humayun	made	out	a	figure	climbing	the	cliff.	Sometimes	it	disappeared	but	reappearing
seemed	 to	 make	 good	 progress.Then	 it	 went	 out	 of	 sight	 entirely	 for	 a	 while.	 When	 Humayun	 next
saw	the	scout	he	was	much	lower	down.	Humayun	paced	to	and	fro,	waiting	for	his	return,	fearing
that	the	last	few	yards	had	proved	impassable	but	hoping	they	had	not.	Half	an	hour	later	Ahmed	Khan
was	back	on	the	tree-covered	hill.	His	hands	were	grazed	in	places	and	the	knees	of	his	baggy	pants
were	 torn.	 By	 the	 uneven	 way	 he	 was	 walking	 his	 left	 boot	 seemed	 to	 have	 lost	 some	 of	 its	 leather
banding	but	he	was	smiling	broadly.
‘There	appear	to	be	no	defenders.	It’s	not	too	difficult	to	get	within	forty	feet	of	the	top	but	those
last	 few	 feet	 are	 very	 awkward	 with	 very	 few	 footholds.	 For	 a	 mountain	 man	 like	 me	 it	 should	 be
possible	to	get	up	one	of	the	narrow	clefts,	putting	feet	against	one	side	and	back	against	the	other.	But
it	would	be	impossible	for	many,	particularly	when	encumbered	by	weapons.	However ’	–	and	here	he
smiled	again	–	‘the	rock	is	fissured	and	soft	enough	for	those	going	first	to	drive	metal	spikes	into
the	cliff	to	make	a	kind	of	ladder	for	the	less	skilled	to	climb.’

‘I	give	thanks	to	God	and	to	you	for	your	bravery	and	skill.	We	will	return	tomorrow	night	with
five	hundred	picked	men.	While	our	main	forces	make	a	frontal	attack	to	occupy	the	defenders,	we’ll
make	the	climb	and	get	into	the	fortress	from	the	rear.’

Under	 the	 pale	 light	 of	 the	 moon,	 Humayun	 with	 Ahmed	 Khan	 at	 his	 side	 climbed	 up	 through	 the
scrubby	trees	towards	the	fissure.	The	loose,	smooth	stones	and	pebbles	beneath	their	feet	confirmed
that	 this	 was	 the	 dry	 bed	 of	 a	 stream	 and	 that	 a	 waterfall	 from	 above	 did	 indeed	 feed	 it	 during	 the
rains.
Impatient	 as	 always	 to	 be	 in	 the	 thick	 of	 the	 battle,	 Humayun	 had	 disregarded	 the	 advice	 of	 Baba
Yasaval	 that	 he	 should	 stay	 at	 the	 centre	 where	 he	 could	 better	 direct	 the	 action,	 and	 decided	 to
accompany	Ahmed	Khan	and	ten	of	the	best	climbers	among	his	bodyguard	on	the	mission	to	drive
the	spikes	into	the	rock.	He	knew	he	was	as	agile	as	any	of	them	and	that	by	going	among	the	first
party	he	would	encourage	the	remainder	of	his	five	hundred	men.	The	knowledge	that	their	emperor
had	already	made	the	climb	himself	meant	that	in	honour	they	could	not	fail	to	follow.
All	was	going	well.	They	had	tethered	their	horses	a	considerable	way	off	and	taken	advantage	of
every	scrap	of	cover	and	every	occasion	the	scudding	clouds	had	concealed	the	moon	to	get	to	this
point	 undetected.Just	 in	 front,	 through	 the	 overhanging	 branches,	 Humayun	 saw	 the	 head	 of	 the
streambed	and	the	dark	cliff	rising	above	it.	He	motioned	Ahmed	Khan	and	the	ten	men	who	would
climb	with	them	to	gather	round	him.
‘My	 destiny	 and	 that	 of	 the	 empire	 as	 well	 as	 all	 our	 lives	 are	 at	 stake	 in	 this	 attempt.	 There	 are
great	risks	but	also	great	rewards	if	we	succeed,	as,	God	willing,	we	will.	Now,	check	that	you	have
your	bags	with	your	equipment	safely	secured	and	any	weapon	you	wish	to	carry	well	tucked	in.	We
want	nothing	dropped	to	reveal	our	position	or	to	harm	those	following	behind.’
Humayun	had	left	his	sword	Alamgir	with	Jauhar,	who	was	to	follow	among	the	remainder	of	the
force.	He	had	dressed	simply	in	dark	clothes	like	the	rest	of	his	men	but	tied	to	a	leather	thong	around
his	neck	was	Timur ’s	ring.	Just	before	he	began	the	ascent	he	took	it	out	and	kissed	it.	Then	they	were
off,	Ahmed	Khan	in	front	searching	for	the	hand	–	and	footholds	he	had	used	the	previous	day	and
signalling	 to	 Humayun,	 close	 behind	 now,	 to	 follow.	 Although	 occasionally	 they	 dislodged	 a	 few
small	 stones,	 sending	 them	 tumbling	 down	 to	 the	 ground	 below,	 Humayun	 hoped	 any	 sounds	 they
were	making	would	be	masked	by	the	booms	that	were	now	resounding	from	his	camp	as	his	cannon
heralded	the	frontal	attack	that	was	to	serve	as	a	distraction.
Within	 twenty	 minutes,	 the	 two	 men	 were	 at	 the	 base	 of	 the	 final	 fissure.	 Looking	 upwards
Humayun	 realised	 how	 difficult	 it	 would	 be	 to	 climb.	 The	 rock	 seemed	 worn	 smooth	 by	 the	 initial
rush	of	the	waterfall	and	the	cleft	was	just	too	wide	to	brace	the	back	comfortably	against	one	side
while	climbing	up	the	other	with	the	feet.	The	spikes	that	Ahmed	Khan	–	resting	on	a	ledge	that	could
only	be	two	feet	wide	–	was	pulling	from	the	satchel	slung	across	his	body	and	pushing	into	the	dark
sash	around	his	waist	would	be	essential.	Humayun	began	to	unpack	his	own	hammer.
‘Majesty,	the	first	ten	feet	looked	the	smoothest	yesterday.	I	will	brace	myself	in	the	cleft	and	you
must	climb	over	me	using	my	limbs	as	steps	to	get	into	a	position	to	drive	in	the	first	spikes.’
Humayun	nodded	and	Ahmed	Khan	crammed	himself	into	the	rocky	fissure.	Humayun	then	put	a
foot	 on	 Ahmed	 Khan’s	 tensed	 thigh	 and	 pushed	 himself	 up	 until	 he	 could	 perch	 on	 Ahmed	 Khan’s

shoulders.	Reaching	up	above	his	head,	he	felt	along	the	surface	of	the	rock	until	he	detected	a	small
crack.	Pulling	his	hammer	and	a	foot-long	spike	from	his	belt,	he	drove	the	spike	into	the	rock,	each
clang	 of	 the	 hammer	 seeming	 to	 the	 anxious,	 sweating	 Humayun	 to	 echo	 alarmingly	 around	 the
fissure.	However,	there	was	no	movement	from	above	and	soon	the	spike	was	in.	Humayun	tugged	at
it	and	finding	it	firm	used	it	to	move	up	half	off	Ahmed	Khan’s	shoulders	to	locate	a	place	for	the
next	spike.
Again	it	went	in	well	and,	supporting	himself	mostly	on	the	spikes	and	partly	by	bracing	his	back	to
the	 rock,	 Humayun	 climbed	 up,	 finding	 another	 foothold.	 And	 so	 it	 went	 on	 as,	 sweating	 and
breathing	 hard,	 the	 two	 men	 made	 it	 to	 about	 ten	 feet	 from	 the	 top	 where	 to	 their	 consternation	 a
rocky	outcrop	seemed	to	bar	their	way.	However,	tugging	at	Humayun’s	clothes	in	a	way	he	would
never	 normally	 have	 done,	 Ahmed	 Khan	 gestured	 through	 the	 gloom	 to	 a	 thick	 length	 of	 jungle
creeper	hanging	over	the	lip	and	dangling	down	about	six	feet	to	their	right.
‘Majesty,	I	think	I	can	reach	it	and	use	it	to	climb	the	final	distance,	hitting	in	spikes	as	I	go,	but	I
must	be	the	one	to	make	the	attempt	as	I	am	lighter	than	you	and	–	pardon	me,	Majesty	–	to	do	so	I
must	use	you	as	my	ladder.’
Humayun	 nodded	 and	 gripping	 the	 last	 spikes	 tilted	 his	 body	 to	 the	 right.	 Soon	 he	 felt	 Ahmed
Khan’s	foot	on	his	left	shoulder,	then	it	slipped	painfully	against	his	neck	and	suddenly	it	was	gone.
Ahmed	 Khan	 was	 swinging	 from	 the	 creeper,	 thumping	 spikes	 in	 to	 provide	 a	 route	 round	 the
overhang	to	the	top.	Then	he	was	up,	waving	down	to	Humayun	to	follow,	which	he	did,	resisting	the
temptation	to	close	his	eyes	as	he	manoeuvred	out	and	around	the	overhang.	Then	he	too	was	on	top.
Panting	so	heavily	that	he	could	scarcely	speak,	Humayun	whispered,	‘Thank	you,	Ahmed	Khan.	I	will
remember	your	courage.’
In	 half	 an	 hour	 enough	 men	 had	 climbed	 up,	 driving	 in	 more	 spikes	 and	 using	 ropes	 to	 rig
makeshift	ladders	to	make	it	easier	for	those	following	to	form	an	advance	party	to	move	towards	the
fort.	Humayun	addressed	the	first	hundred	or	so	gathered	around	him.	‘Remember	we	must	make	no
noise	and	therefore	rely	on	our	old	silent	weapons	–	the	bow	and	arrow	and	the	sword	–	and	on	our
bare	hands	to	kill	any	enemy	we	find.	Once	inside,	I	will	instruct	the	four	of	you	who	carry	trumpets
and	 drums	 to	 make	 the	 pre-agreed	 signals	 to	 alert	 our	 forces	 attacking	 from	 the	 front	 that	 we	 are
inside	so	they	can	redouble	their	efforts.	Now	let	us	move	forward.’
Advancing	through	the	bushes,	the	men	crept	more	than	half	a	mile	before	the	vegetation	thinned
out	and	allowed	them	to	make	out	about	a	thousand	yards	in	front	of	them	the	rear	wall	of	the	fortress
–	 much	 lower	 than	 those	 at	 the	 front	 and	 sides	 and	 with	 no	 sign	 of	 guards.	 Crouching	 and	 taking
advantage	 of	 the	 cover	 of	 the	 few	 remaining	 bushes	 and	 the	 darkness	 as	 some	 large	 clouds	 drifted
over	the	moon,	the	men	ran	across	the	intervening	ground	to	squash	themselves	against	the	walls,	any
sound	they	made	more	than	blotted	out	by	the	noises	of	battle	coming	from	the	front	of	the	fort.	Some
of	the	men	had	brought	ropes	with	them	and,	at	an	order	from	Humayun,	Ahmed	Khan	seized	one	and
began	to	climb	up	the	wall	at	a	corner	where	it	turned	almost	at	right	angles	to	follow	the	contours	of
the	 land.	 Within	 seconds,	 he	 had	 scrambled	 to	 the	 top	 using	 the	 same	 techniques	 as	 he	 had	 in	 the
fissure	and	thrown	down	his	rope	for	others	to	follow.	Soon	several	other	men	had	climbed	up	and
more	ropes	were	hanging	down.
Humayun	himself	was	quickly	on	the	smooth	battlements,	peering	along	them	to	see	whether	there
was	a	guardhouse.	Yes,	there	was	one	–	about	a	hundred	yards	away.	Suddenly	its	door	opened	and	six
men	 appeared	 with	 torches	 –	 presumably	 a	 skeleton	 guard	 left	 behind	 while	 the	 others	 rushed	 to
bolster	the	troops	on	the	front	wall	which	judging	from	the	noise	and	commotion	was	now	under	full
assault.	The	guards	moved	towards	the	wall	to	look	down	and,	as	they	did	so,	Humayun	ordered	his

men	 carrying	 bows	 to	 shoot	 as	 fast	 as	 they	 could	 before	 the	 guards	 could	 raise	 the	 alarm.	 Almost
immediately	there	was	a	hiss	of	arrows	and	the	six	men	were	hit,	two	falling	headfirst	from	the	walls
they	were	looking	over	and	another	drumming	his	legs	on	the	stone	battlements	in	his	death	throes.
The	other	three	were	at	once	still.
Humayun	led	the	charge	towards	the	guardhouse.	As	he	reached	it,	another	Gujarati	who	had	been
hiding	 inside	 sprinted	 out,	 making	 for	 a	 covered	 staircase	 only	 ten	 yards	 away	 leading	 to	 the
courtyard	below.	He	was	too	near	it	for	there	to	be	time	to	loose	off	arrows	before	he	disappeared
beneath	its	protective	roof.	Humayun	ran	after	him,	arms	and	legs	pumping,	and	reached	the	top	of
the	staircase	to	see	that	the	guard	had	descended	most	of	its	twenty	or	so	stone	steps.	Without	pausing
to	think,	Humayun	leaped	from	the	top	step	on	to	the	guard,	knocking	him	down	to	the	bottom.	Both
men	were	winded	but	the	guard	was	the	first	to	his	feet	and	attempted	to	run	on.	Humayun	scrambled
after	him	and	catching	him	by	the	ankle	brought	him	to	the	ground	once	more.	Summoning	all	his
skill	as	a	wrestler	to	pin	the	wildly	struggling	man	beneath	him,	Humayun	succeeded	in	closing	his
fingers	round	his	neck	and	started	to	squeeze	the	life	out	of	him	until	he	heard	the	man’s	breath	rattle
in	his	throat	and	threw	the	limp	body	aside.	Humayun’s	men	were	surrounding	him	again.
‘We	now	have	at	least	four	hundred	men,’	Ahmed	Khan	gasped.	‘What	next?’
‘Get	as	far	to	the	front	of	the	fort	as	we	can	before	we	are	detected.’
Ahead,	the	men	could	see	the	flashes	of	the	cannon	and	hear	their	boom	and	the	crack	of	muskets	as
well	 as	 all	 the	 cries	 and	 screams	 of	 battle.	 Smoke	 was	 drifting	 across	 the	 courtyard,	 in	 particular
through	 a	 large	 gateway	 in	 the	 opposite	 wall.	 This	 must	 mean	 that	 the	 gate	 gave	 directly	 on	 to	 the
main	part	of	the	fort	where	the	defenders	were	concentrated,	Humayun	thought.	‘Get	our	men	to	the
gate,	half	on	each	side,	and	then	we’ll	sound	our	drums	and	trumpets	to	alert	our	fellows	attacking	the
front	wall	before	we	charge	into	the	enemy’s	rear,’	he	ordered.	The	command	was	quickly	passed	on
and	 at	 Humayun’s	 signal	 his	 men	 rushed	 to	 the	 gateway.	 Peering	 round	 the	 corner	 of	 the	 gate,
Humayun	 could	 see	 through	 the	 billowing	 smoke	 cannon	 positions	 on	 the	 front	 wall	 and	 also
defenders	firing	and	pouring	burning	pitch	and	oil	on	to	his	own	men	attacking	below.
‘Trumpeters	and	drummers,	give	the	signal	and	keep	on	doing	so.	The	rest	of	you,	follow	me!’	As
the	 instruments	 sounded	 out,	 Humayun	 rushed	 through	 the	 gateway.	 Once	 through,	 the	 first	 volley
from	 his	 archers	 took	 many	 of	 the	 Gujaratis	 in	 the	 back,	 the	 whole	 crew	 of	 one	 cannon	 falling
together.	Turning	in	surprise	and	confusion,	some	tried	to	fight	back.	Others	seemed	to	lose	heart	and
ran	into	the	shelter	of	the	buildings.
‘Make	for	the	main	gatehouse.	Kill	the	defenders	and	open	the	gates	to	our	troops.’
Humayun’s	 men	 rushed	 to	 obey,	 one	 of	 his	 trumpeters	 at	 their	 head,	 still	 sounding	 his	 call.
However,	 from	 behind	 a	 pile	 of	 his	 dead	 comrades,	 a	 Gujarati	 fired	 an	 arrow	 which	 caught	 the
trumpeter	 in	 the	 throat,	 and	 as	 he	 fell	 his	 last	 breath	 bubbling	 with	 blood	 produced	 a	 weird	 scream
from	his	instrument.	Nevertheless,	Humayun,	with	Ahmed	Khan	and	at	least	fifty	men	at	his	side,	were
in	 the	 gatehouse	 killing	 or	 putting	 to	 flight	 its	 defenders.	 Soon	 they	 were	 winching	 open	 the	 gates.
Once	they	were	even	a	quarter	open,	the	Moghuls	began	to	pour	through.	Seeing	them	do	so,	most	of
the	remaining	defenders	threw	down	their	arms	but	a	few	took	refuge	in	an	inner	keep	and	maintained
steady	fire	on	Humayun’s	men,	several	of	whom	fell,	mortally	wounded.
‘Get	our	men	under	cover.We	need	not	risk	more	casualties.	The	fort	is	ours.	Bring	me	the	most
senior	of	the	Gujaratis	we’ve	captured.’
Soon,	a	tall,	balding	officer	with	blood	running	from	sword-slash	wounds	to	his	arms	and	legs	was
dragged	before	Humayun	and	pushed	to	his	knees.	‘I	am	not	a	barbarian,’	Humayun	told	him.	‘I	will
not	spill	blood	unnecessarily.	You	will	go	to	those	in	the	keep	and	tell	them	resistance	is	useless.	If

they	surrender	now	I	swear	on	the	Holy	Book	that	I	will	spare	their	lives.	If	they	resist,	all	will	die,
including	those	I	have	already	captured.’
Humayun	 saw	 the	 fear	 and	 alarm	 in	 the	 man’s	 eyes.	 He	 believed	 him	 and	 should	 convince	 his
fellows.
‘Now	go.	You	have	ten	minutes	in	which	to	bring	an	answer.’
Humayun	ordered	his	men	to	hold	their	fire	while	the	officer	limped	over	to	the	keep.	Recognising
him,	 the	 defenders	 swung	 open	 the	 heavy	 metal-studded	 oak	 door	 and	 he	 disappeared	 inside.	 After
five	minutes	he	re-emerged	and	crossed	to	Humayun’s	troops.	‘They	will	surrender	provided	they	can
leave	with	their	personal	weapons.’
‘Agreed,’	 said	 Humayun	 and	 immediately	 a	 great	 surge	 of	 relief	 travelled	 through	 him.	 He	 had
been	 victorious	 in	 his	 first	 campaign	 as	 emperor.	 ‘We	 have	 won	 a	 great	 victory.Take	 care	 of	 our
wounded.	Then	start	the	search	for	the	treasure	vaults.’

‘We	 still	 can’t	 find	 the	 entrance	 to	 the	 vaults,	 Majesty,’	 one	 of	 his	 officers	 told	 Humayun	 thirty-six
hours	later.	‘May	we	put	some	of	the	captured	Gujaratis	who	remain	to	the	torture?’
‘No.	I	promised	on	the	Holy	Book	they	could	depart	unharmed	and	under	safe	conduct.	We	need	to
secure	the	treasure	–	but	there	are	other	means	to	get	information	from	people	than	torture.	Tell	Baba
Yasaval	 to	 throw	 a	 feast	 for	 the	 most	 senior	 of	 the	 captured	 Gujaratis	 on	 the	 pretext	 of	 honouring
their	bravery.	Then	when	many	toasts	have	been	drunk	and	the	alcohol	has	loosened	their	lips,	bring
the	conversation	round	to	the	subject	of	treasure	and	see	what	you	get	from	them	that	way.’
Towards	 midnight	 that	 same	 day,	 Baba	 Yasaval	 staggered	 up	 to	 the	 door	 of	 the	 apartments
temporarily	occupied	by	Humayun.	Even	though	his	gait	was	unsteady	and	his	eyes	were	unfocused,	a
broad	smile	creased	his	face.	‘May	I	speak	to	His	Majesty?’
A	 few	 moments	 later,	 he	 was	 admitted	 to	 Humayun’s	 presence.	 ‘I’m	 sure	 I	 know	 the	 answer,
Majesty.	I’ve	spent	much	of	the	night	dining	and	carousing	under	the	stars	in	the	courtyard	with	the
Gujarati	officers.	As	he	drank	deeply	of	the	rich	red	wine	of	Ghazni,	one	of	them	–	Alum	Khan	by
name	–	relaxed	and	became	ever	more	garrulous,	confiding	titbits	of	gossip	about	the	Gujarati	royal
family	 and	 his	 fellow	 officers.	 When	 I	 thought	 the	 moment	 right,	 I	 slipped	 in	 a	 question	 about	 the
treasure.	Startled,	he	did	not	betray	the	location	in	words	but	I	noticed	his	eyes	flash	across	to	one	of
the	marble	pools	and	he	became	flustered.
‘Instinctively	I	knew	that	the	pool	had	something	to	do	with	it	so	I	questioned	him	further	about	it.
You	 know	 –	 how	 long	 it	 had	 been	 there,	 its	 depth,	 its	 construction,	 how	 often	 it	 was	 drained	 and
refilled.	 With	 each	 question	 he	 became	 ever	 more	 agitated	 as	 he	 stammered	 unconvincing	 and
contradictory	 answers.	 I	 am	 sure	 the	 entrance	 to	 the	 vaults	 is	 concealed	 beneath	 that	 pool.’	 Baba
Yasaval	stopped,	seemingly	exhausted	by	the	effort	of	forcing	himself	to	speak	so	coherently	after	his
drinking.
‘You’ve	done	well.We’ll	drain	the	pool	and	excavate	beneath	it	as	soon	as	it	is	light.	Now	go	and	lie
down	before	you	fall	down.’
Early	the	next	morning,	amid	the	raucous	cawing	of	green	parrots	from	the	jungle	surrounding	the
fortress,	Humayun,	with	a	somewhat	pale	and	bedraggled	Baba	Yasaval	at	his	side,	watched	as	a	team
of	labourers	naked	but	for	their	white	loincloths	formed	a	chain	to	empty	the	pool	with	their	leather

buckets.	 Then,	 clambering	 down,	 they	 began	 to	 prise	 up	 one	 by	 one	 the	 marble	 slabs	 forming	 its
lining	before	heaving	them	on	to	the	poolside	where	others	took	them	and	piled	them	carefully	in	the
courtyard.
As	the	first	slabs	were	moved	there	was,	to	Baba	Yasaval’s	obvious	consternation,	nothing	to	see
beneath	them	but	reddish	sandy	earth.	Then,	as	Humayun	paced	impatiently	along	the	poolside,	Baba
Yasaval	 shouted,	 ‘Look,	 Majesty!	 Those	 four	 slabs	 towards	 the	 centre	 have	 indentations	 and	 chips
around	their	sides.	They’ve	been	lifted	before.’
‘You’re	right,’	Humayun	replied.	‘Remove	them.’
As	 soon	 as	 the	 crowbars	 were	 inserted	 the	 slabs	 came	 up	 quickly	 and	 as	 the	 sweating	 labourers
lifted	them,	Humayun	saw	part	of	a	wooden	trap	door	emerge	beneath	them.
‘That’s	 it!	 Your	 instincts	 were	 right,	 Baba	 Yasaval,	 I’m	 sure.	 What	 a	 reward	 I	 will	 give	 you	 to
compensate	for	that	sore	head.’
Jumping	down	on	to	the	pool	bottom,	Humayun	himself	tugged	at	the	trap	door.	It	came	up	easily	to
reveal	 several	 shallow	 steps	 leading	 to	 a	 low,	 iron-studded	 door	 secured	 with	 a	 large	 metal	 lock.
‘Give	 me	 a	 crowbar,’	 he	 ordered.	 Taking	 it,	 he	 pushed	 its	 tip	 into	 the	 lock	 and	 using	 all	 his	 force
levered	it	apart.	Swinging	the	door	open,	he	bent	his	head	and	entered.	In	the	half-light	he	caught	the
glint	 of	 gold.	 As	 his	 eyes	 adjusted	 he	 saw	 that	 the	 floor	 was	 piled	 with	 thick	 gold	 ingots	 and	 open
chests	of	what	looked	like	gems.	There	seemed	to	be	several	other	chambers	radiating	off	the	first.
Humayun	 shouted	 for	 torches	 and	 as	 servants	 brought	 them	 he	 saw	 that	 the	 chests	 indeed	 contained
sapphires,	 rubies,	 emeralds	 and	 other	 glittering	 stones	 and	 that	 there	 was	 more	 booty	 in	 the	 other
chambers	including	silver	dishes	and	drinking	vessels	and	ornately	decorated	weapons	 and	 armour.
He	would	have	more	than	enough	to	reward	his	faithful	and	brave	warriors.
‘Remove	 all	 the	 gold,	 jewels	 and	 other	 valuables.	 Have	 them	 guarded	 well	 and	 their	 number
recorded.	Tonight	we	will	feast	and	share	our	spoils.’
In	 the	 late	 afternoon,	 servants	 and	 soldiers	 alike	 worked	 hard.	 Their	 first	 task	 was	 to	 construct	 a
low	wooden	platform	in	the	centre	of	the	courtyard	from	which	Humayun	could	address	his	troops
and	distribute	their	share	of	the	booty	which	was	piled	under	guard	at	the	back	of	the	dais.	Then	they
rigged	additional	awnings	around	the	courtyard	using	all	the	fabrics	they	could	find,	whether	wool,
cotton	 or	 mere	 jute,	 whether	 bright	 reds	 or	 purples	 or	 duller	 duns	 and	 greens,	 whether	 elaborately
patterned	or	plain.	Beneath	them	they	improvised	low	wooden	tables	and	around	them	scattered	all	the
cushions,	blankets	and	mattresses	they	could	find	for	the	banqueters	to	recline	upon.	They	fashioned
rough	 stands	 for	 torches	 and	 placed	 them	 where	 they	 were	 least	 likely	 to	 get	 knocked	 over	 as	 the
revelries	got	wilder	as	they	inevitably	would.
As	they	were	completing	their	work,	their	appetites	were	whetted	by	the	smell	of	cooking	wafting
from	the	nearby	field	kitchens.	Sheep	were	roasting	on	spits,	men	were	stirring	spices	into	bubbling
vats	 of	 vegetables,	 more	 skilled	 cooks	 were	 combining	 sugar,	 yoghurt,	 rosewater	 and	 spices	 in
smaller	 copper	 pots	 to	 make	 sweetmeats.	 Probably	 more	 important	 to	 the	 mind	 of	 many	 of	 the
soldiers	who,	in	common	with	Humayun	and	most	of	his	courtiers,	were	good	Muslims	but	could	not
convince	 themselves	 that	 the	 consumption	 of	 alcohol	 was	 entirely	 sinful,	 all	 the	 supplies	 of	 drink
from	the	fortress	and	Humayun’s	own	baggage	train	–	including	the	red	wine	of	Ghazni	that	had	been
the	downfall	of	Alum	Khan	–	were	being	assembled	in	whatever	containers	were	available.
An	hour	after	sunset,	when	the	bats	were	swooping	through	the	warm,	velvet	darkness	and	the	noise
of	 insects	 was	 at	 its	 height,	 two	 of	 Humayun’s	 trumpeters	 put	 their	 lips	 to	 their	 six-foot-long	 brass
instruments.	 Then,	 as	 their	 reverberations	 stilled	 the	 voices	 of	 officers	 and	 common	 soldiers	 alike,
Humayun	appeared	from	the	main	door	of	the	fortress	clad	in	a	tunic	and	trousers	of	gold-coloured

material	over	which	he	was	wearing	a	coat	of	gold	chain	mail	found	in	the	treasure	chambers.	To	the
continuing	sound	of	the	trumpets	and	the	heavy	beat	of	the	large	military	drums	from	the	battlements
above,	Humayun	advanced	through	the	ranks	of	his	soldiers	to	the	low	dais	and	slowly	mounted	it,
followed	 by	 his	 most	 senior	 officers,	 and	 stood	 before	 the	 assembled	 treasure.	 Motioning	 the
trumpeters	and	drummers	to	be	silent	he	addressed	his	men.
‘Tonight	we	celebrate	the	successful	end	to	our	campaign	in	Gujarat.	Everywhere	we	have	defeated
those	 of	 our	 enemies	 brave	 enough	 to	 face	 us.	 Sultan	 Bahadur	 Shah	 has	 not	 even	 dared	 to	 do	 so,
hiding	in	the	most	remote	corners	of	his	realm	like	the	cowardly	rat	he	is.Yet	we	have	conquered	his
lands	 and	 behind	 me	 you	 see	 all	 the	 piles	 of	 his	 treasure	 we	 have	 made	 our	 own.	 First	 let	 us	 give
thanks	to	God	for	our	victory.’
‘Allah	akbar,	God	is	great,’	came	the	instant	response	from	the	ranks.
‘Before	we	feast	let	me	share	some	of	this	treasure	with	you.	Each	senior	officer	has	been	ordered
to	bring	his	shield	to	this	assembly.	Shortly	you	will	see	why.	It	is	not	for	fear	of	sudden	attack	–	our
enemies	 are	 well	 scattered	 and	 demoralised	 –	 but	 to	 carry	 off	 rewards	 for	 himself	 and	 his	 men.
Officers,	advance	with	your	shields.	First	you,	Baba	Yasaval.’
The	shaven-headed	Baba	Yasaval	walked	forward	and	bowed	low	before	Humayun.
‘Take	your	shield	from	your	back	and	place	it	upside	down	on	the	ground.’
Baba	Yasaval	did	so.
‘Servants.	Pile	it	with	gold	and	silver	bars	and	top	it	with	jewels.’The	servants	brought	forward	the
precious	 metals	 and	 gems,	 glinting	 and	 glittering	 in	 the	 torchlight,	 and	 heaped	 them	 on	 the	 shield.
‘Now	 carry	 it	 away,	 Baba	 Yasaval,	 with	 my	 heartfelt	 thanks,	 and	 if	 you’re	 still	 too	 weak	 from
drinking	get	your	men	to	help!’
The	 burden	 would	 have	 been	 far	 too	 great	 for	 any	 man,	 young	 or	 old,	 hungover	 or	 not,	 and	 a
smiling	 Baba	 Yasaval	 bowed	 his	 head,	 his	 hand	 on	 his	 heart,	 and	 motioned	 to	 his	 men	 to	 assist.	 As
together	 they	 bore	 their	 treasure	 off,	 Humayun	 signalled	 to	 the	 next	 officer,	 a	 tall	 pale	 Afghani,	 to
mount	 the	 stage	 and	 the	 process	 was	 repeated.	 All	 the	 time	 the	 cries	 of	 ‘Glory	 to	 Humayun,	 our
emperor,	our	padishah’	increased.	As	he	acknowledged	the	acclaim,	both	hands	held	high	above	his
head,	 Humayun	 smiled.	 He	 had	 been	 successful	 in	 his	 first	 campaign	 as	 emperor.	 Like	 his	 father
before	 him,	 he	 had	 brought	 himself	 and	 his	 men	 glory	 and	 booty.	 Life	 was	 good	 –	 long	 might	 it
continue	so.

Chapter	4
In	the	Balance
The	monsoon	rains	were	falling	so	hard	that	the	courtyards	of	the	Agra	fort	were	awash.	The	heavy
drops	 bounced	 off	 the	 paving	 stones	 and	 drowned	 the	 fountains	 that	 should	 have	 been	 bubbling	 up.
Clothes	were	beginning	to	mildew	and	in	the	imperial	library	anxious	scholars	were	at	their	annual
task	of	trying	to	protect	from	the	damp	the	manuscripts	brought	to	Hindustan	by	Babur.	Among	them
were	 Babur ’s	 own	 diaries,	 which	 Humayun	 had	 ordered	 his	 librarians	 to	 store	 in	 a	 specially	 made
metal	box	with	a	tight-fitting	lid	to	protect	against	the	moist	air	and	the	ceaseless	swarms	of	insects.	In
the	 room	 where	 the	 box	 was	 kept,	 a	 fire	 of	 camphor	 wood	 was	 kept	 constantly	 burning	 during	 the
monsoon	to	dry	the	air.
Late	last	night,	oblivious	of	the	pouring	rain,	Humayun	had	returned	to	Agra	in	triumph	from	his
conquest	 of	 Gujarat.	 The	 gold,	 silver	 and	 jewels	 that	 remained,	 even	 after	 rewarding	 his	 men,	 had
already	been	piled	in	the	imperial	treasure	houses.	Except,	that	was,	for	a	few	items	that	Humayun	had
kept	back	–	a	silver	belt	set	with	pearls	that	he	would	enjoy	fastening	around	Salima’s	supple	waist,	a
carved	jade	cup	for	his	mother	Maham,	and	for	Khanzada	a	double-stranded	necklace	of	rubies	 and
uncut	emeralds	set	in	gold	that	had	reputedly	adorned	the	throats	of	generations	of	royal	women	of
Gujarat.	Unlocking	an	enamelled	casket	he	drew	it	out,	admiring	once	more	the	fiery	brilliance	of	the
rubies	counterpointed	by	the	dark	green	emeralds.
Still	 holding	 the	 necklace,	 Humayun	 made	 for	 his	 aunt’s	 apartments.	 He	 knew	 the	 details	 of	 the
campaign	would	interest	her	but	he	also	wanted	her	advice.	As	he	entered,	he	saw	that	Khanzada	was
reading	 and	 that	 sitting	 by	 her	 side,	 head	 also	 deep	 in	 a	 book,	 was	 his	 eleven-year-old	 half-sister
Gulbadan.	The	child’s	eyes	–	a	dark	tawny	like	her	mother	Dildar ’s	and	her	brother	Hindal’s	–	gazed
up	at	him,	bright	and	curious.
Khanzada	rose	at	once	and	taking	him	by	the	shoulders	kissed	him	on	both	cheeks.	‘Welcome	back,
Humayun.	 You	 conquered	 as	 I	 knew	 you	 would	 .	 .	 .	 Every	 report	 of	 your	 progress	 filled	 me	 with
pride.’
‘I	 have	 a	 gift	 for	 you.’	 Humayun	 opened	 his	 hand	 and	 let	 the	 ruby	 and	 emerald	 necklace	 trickle
through	his	fingers.	Gulbadan	edged	closer	for	a	better	look,	but	Khanzada	seemed	to	hesitate	before
taking	the	jewels	and	holding	them	up	to	the	light.	‘They’re	beautiful,	but	they’re	too	fine	for	me	.	.	.	I
am	 no	 longer	 young.	 Keep	 them	 for	 your	 wife	 when	 you	 take	 one.’	 She	 returned	 the	 necklace	 to
Humayun,	closing	his	fingers	over	it	before	he	could	argue	and	gestured	him	to	sit	by	her.	‘Gulbadan
–	leave	us.	But	come	to	me	again	tomorrow	–	there	is	a	Persian	poem	I	want	to	show	you.’
As	the	girl	closed	her	book	and	walked	slowly	away,	Khanzada	looked	after	her.	‘I’ve	grown	fond
of	her	since	her	mother ’s	death	last	year	–	she’s	a	clever	child	and	notices	everything.’
‘As	you	did	at	her	age?	My	father	often	told	me	nothing	escaped	you.’
‘He	flattered	me.’
‘I	don’t	think	so,	and	it’s	for	that	reason	that	once	again	I	come	to	you	for	advice.	I	learned	many
things	during	my	campaign	against	Bahadur	Shah.	My	victory	proved	to	me	that	I	can	inspire	men	to

follow	me	in	battle	and	confirmed	to	me	that	I	am	a	good	warrior	.	.	.	Many	more	fights	lie	ahead	of
me	and	I	don’t	fear	them	–	indeed	I’m	eager	for	them	if	they	help	me	make	our	empire	more	secure	.	.
.’
‘You’re	right.You’ve	proved	you	are	a	leader	of	men.	That	you	are	fearless.	So	what	is	worrying
you?’
‘As	I	travelled	back	to	Agra,	I	often	thought	to	myself,	when	the	tensions	and	excitement	of	battle
are	over,	what	then?	I	know	how	to	be	a	warrior,	but	do	I	really	understand	how	to	govern	and	keep
an	empire?	How	to	behave	when	sitting	on	my	gilded	throne,	surrounded	by	counsellors,	sycophants
and	 suppliants,	 all	 eager	 for	 my	 attention	 to	 their	 requests	 or	 problems?	 Sometimes	 I	 just	 wish	 to
banish	them	all	and	be	with	Salima	or	one	of	my	other	concubines,	or	go	out	hunting.’
‘That	is	only	natural	for	a	young	man,	but	you	must	resist	such	temptations.	A	ruler	must	be	alive	to
what	 is	 going	 on	 around	 him	 and	 sensitive	 enough	 to	 sniff	 out	 discontent	 before	 it	 ferments	 into
rebellion.	 You	 will	 learn	 just	 as	 your	 father	 learned.	 It	 wasn’t	 easy	 for	 him	 either.	 He	 was	 much
younger	than	you	when	God	gave	him	a	throne	but	he	became	a	great	ruler.	Read	his	diaries	–	you
will	find	what	you	seek	in	their	pages,	born	of	hard	experience	and	blood	.	.	.’	Khanzada	paused,	then
smiled	a	little	sadly.	‘If	Babur	were	here	with	us	now	he	would	tell	you	to	be	vigilant	about	those	you
allow	close	to	you	at	court	.	.	.	Take	care	to	whom	you	give	power,	trust	few.	Always	ask	yourself	the
question	why	–	Why	is	this	man	advising	me	to	do	this?	What	will	he	gain	if	I	agree?	What	will	he
lose	if	I	don’t?	Will	he	be	grateful	for	what	he	is	given	or	think	it	is	due	to	him	as	of	right?’
‘I	think	I	understand	much	of	this.	It’s	almost	as	if	a	ruler ’s	watchword	must	be	suspicion.	It	grieves
me	it	must	be	so,	but	my	half-brothers’	rebellion	has	taught	me	to	be	less	trusting	and	more	on	guard,
even	with	members	of	my	close	family	who	I	thought	would	be	my	natural	allies.	But	what	about	my
subjects,	the	ordinary	people	I	see	only	as	suppliants	or	on	a	royal	progress	but	whose	loyalty	I	must
have?’
‘You	will	always	be	remote	to	them.	What	matters	is	not	how	you	really	are	but	how	they	perceive
you.	You	must	appear	to	them	whenever	you	can	and	when	you	do	you	must	be	like	the	sun	to	them,
too	bright	to	gaze	upon.	They	must	believe	in	your	power	to	protect	them	.	.	.	and	in	your	power	to
punish	 any	 who	 defy	 you.	 Remember	 how	 our	 ancestor	 Timur	 dazzled	 his	 people	 not	 only	 by	 his
conquests	 but	 by	 his	 magnificence.	 The	 palaces	 and	 mosques	 he	 built	 in	 Samarkand,	 the	 fabulous
wealth	he	displayed	and	distributed,	were	as	important	as	his	victories	in	stamping	his	footprint	for
ever	upon	the	earth.’
Humayun	rose	and	walked	slowly	over	to	the	casement.	The	rain	was	easing	and	a	few	pale	shafts
of	sunlight	were	penetrating	the	sullen	grey	sky.	His	aunt	was	right	–	he	must	not	begrudge	the	time
and	effort	he	expended	on	court	politics.	He	must	give	his	people	not	only	victories	but	also	pageants
and	spectacles	.	.	.	They	must	see	him	not	as	a	man	but	as	an	image	of	perfection	and	power.
‘Humayun	–	look	at	this	.	.	.’
Turning,	he	saw	Khanzada	undoing	two	silver	clasps	on	the	carved	ivory	covers	of	a	large	book
that	 one	 of	 her	 attendants	 had	 brought	 her.	 Resting	 it	 on	 a	 sandalwood	 stand,	 she	 began	 to	 turn	 the
pages,	frowning	as	she	scanned	the	lines	until,	finding	what	she	wanted,	she	gave	a	nod	of	satisfaction.
‘While	you	were	away,	I	ordered	some	of	Sultan	Ibrahim’s	household	documents	to	be	translated
into	our	tongue.	To	our	eyes	the	court	customs	of	the	rulers	of	Hindustan	seem	strange	–	bizarre	even
–	but	they	deserve	careful	study.	For	example,	it’s	written	here	that	every	year,	on	the	anniversary	of
his	accession,	Sultan	Ibrahim	was	weighed	at	a	public	ceremony	and	an	equivalent	weight	of	silver,
food	and	fine	cloth	was	distributed	to	his	courtiers	and	the	people	according	to	their	rank	and	merit.
Why	shouldn’t	you	do	something	similar?	Bind	your	subjects	high	and	low	to	you	by	showing	them

your	wealth	and	power	–	and	your	generosity.	See	–	the	ceremony	is	described	in	precise	detail	.	.	.’
Coming	 close	 to	 Khanzada,	 Humayun	 read	 over	 her	 shoulder.	 At	 first,	 the	 description	 of	 the
elaborate	 ritual	 of	 the	 weighing	 ceremony	 made	 him	 smile.	 No	 wonder	 the	 Moghuls	 had	 smashed
through	Sultan	Ibrahim’s	armies	at	Panipat	if	the	sultan	had	indulged	in	such	things.	It	seemed	soft,
unmanly,	 to	 dish	 out	 wealth	 that	 had	 not	 been	 earned	 through	 hard	 combat	 and	 blood.	 How	 much
better	in	the	immediate	aftermath	of	victory	to	pile	his	warriors’	shields	with	booty	.	.	.
His	 lip	 curled	 a	 little	 with	 contempt.	 The	 Moghuls	 hadn’t	 conquered	 Hindustan	 to	 rule	 as	 its	 past
kings	 had	 done.	 But	 Khanzada’s	 eyes,	 fixed	 intently	 on	 his,	 made	 him	 pause	 and	 as	 he	 did	 so	 his
certainty	wavered.	Perhaps	his	reactions	were	still	those	of	a	nomadic	warrior	from	the	Asian	steppes
.	.	.	But	he	was	in	Hindustan	now	and	must	learn	to	change.	Khanzada	could	be	right.	A	king’s	power
did	reside	in	his	ability	to	awe	and	reward	as	well	as	to	conquer	on	the	battlefield.	There	might	indeed
be	something	in	these	old	ceremonies.	Perhaps	he	should	adopt	some	of	Sultan	Ibrahim’s	customs	but
build	on	them	to	create	new	spectacles	.	.	.	new	magnificence	.	.	.
Humayun	put	his	hand	on	Khanzada’s	shoulder.	‘Again	you	have	shown	me	what	I	should	do	.	.	.’

Humayun	looked	at	his	reflection	in	the	burnished	mirror	held	up	by	Jauhar.	His	robes	were	of	pale
blue	brocade	encrusted	with	gold	embroidery	and	gems	glittered	on	his	fingers	and	around	his	neck.
He	 smiled,	 pleased	 with	 the	 image	 he	 presented,	 encased	 in	 his	 finery.	 In	 fact,	 the	 only	 pieces	 of
jewellery	that	mattered	to	him	were	the	Koh-i-Nur	diamond,	his	Mountain	of	Light,	that	mounted	in
gold	was	pinned	to	his	breast,	and	–	even	more	so	–	Timur ’s	gold	ring	on	the	middle	finger	of	his
right	hand.	The	ring	was	Humayun’s	talisman	–	its	virile,	elemental	strength	a	constant	reminder	of
how	much	he	had	to	live	up	to,	how	much	he	had	yet	to	accomplish	.	.	.
Humayun	signalled	that	he	was	ready	to	proceed	to	the	great	audience	chamber	of	the	Agra	fort.	To
the	 blast	 of	 two	 long-stemmed	 bronze	 trumpets	 and	 cries	 of	 ‘Padishah	 salamat’,	 ‘All	 hail	 the
emperor ’,	he	entered	the	many-pillared	durbar	hall	where	his	leading	subjects	–	his	officers	of	state,
his	commanders,	his	courtiers	and	the	Hindustani	rajas	who	had	acknowledged	his	supremacy	–	were
waiting.	As	they	prostrated	themselves,	touching	their	foreheads	to	the	ground,	they	looked	in	their
bright	robes	like	a	field	of	flowers	tossed	down	by	a	sharp	gust	of	wind.
‘You	may	rise.’
The	 scent	 of	 rosewater,	 cascading	 down	 a	 tiered	 fountain	 at	 the	 far	 end	 of	 the	 hall	 into	 a	 marble
pool	carved	into	the	shape	of	a	lotus	leaf,	mingled	with	the	spicy	incense	smoking	in	four	tall	golden
burners	shaped	like	slender-legged	cranes	with	rubies	for	eyes.	Beneath	Humayun’s	feet,	the	carpets
of	red	and	blue	spread	over	the	stone	floor	felt	thick	and	soft	as	he	advanced	slowly	towards	the	green
velvet,	gold-fringed	canopy	erected	over	a	raised	platform	on	which	stood	giant	golden	scales	–	two
great	saucers,	their	edges	set	with	lozenges	of	pale	pink	quartz	rimmed	by	pearls,	suspended	by	gold
chains	from	a	stout	wooden	frame.
Directly	in	front	of	the	scales	was	the	largesse	to	be	weighed	against	him	–	carved	ivory	boxes	of
unset	gemstones,	gilded	wooden	trunks	filled	with	silver	and	gold	coins	that	had	each	taken	eight	men
to	 carry	 into	 the	 chamber,	 bales	 of	 pashmina	 goat’s	 wool	 so	 soft	 and	 supple	 a	 length	 six	 feet	 wide
could	 pass	 through	 a	 tiny	 golden	 ring,	 rolls	 of	 silks	 in	 rainbow	 colours	 and	 brass	 trays	 piled	 with

spices.
Humayun	surveyed	his	audience,	grouped	around	the	front	and	sides	of	the	dais,	among	them	his
grandfather	Baisanghar	and	his	white-bearded	vizier	Kasim.	The	two	elderly	men	were	watching	him
approvingly	and	for	a	moment	Humayun	thought	of	Babur	whose	early	reign	they	had	also	guided	.	.	.
but	 this	 was	 not	 a	 moment	 for	 grief	 and	 regrets	 but	 for	 pomp	 and	 ceremony.	 He	 had	 an	 imperial
pronouncement	to	deliver.
‘Nine	years	ago	I	fought	by	my	father ’s	side	at	the	battle	of	Panipat.	God	granted	us	a	great	victory
and	a	new	realm.	It	was	also	God’s	will	that	my	father	did	not	live	long	to	enjoy	what	he	had	won.
This	 is	 the	 third	 anniversary	 of	 the	 reading	 of	 the	 khutba	 proclaiming	 me	 Moghul	 emperor	 of
Hindustan.	My	empire	is	still	young	but	it	will	grow	.	.	.	indeed	it	will	become	great,	surpassing	that	of
the	Persian	shah	or	the	Ottoman	sultan.	The	Moghuls’	magnificence	will	blaze	like	the	noonday	sun,
blinding	 those	 who	 dare	 gaze	 into	 its	 heart.	 Already,	 I	 have	 shown	 my	 power	 to	 defeat	 those	 who
threaten	our	borders.	Bahadur	Shah	and	the	Lodi	pretender	Tartar	Khan	skulk	in	the	mountains	and
their	once	great	wealth	now	fills	my	treasuries.	But	you	who	are	loyal	to	me	and	to	my	house,	you
will	share	in	the	glory	and	the	riches,	starting	today.’	Humayun	nodded.	‘Kasim,	let	us	proceed.’
Just	as	they	had	carefully	rehearsed,	Kasim	gestured	to	the	trumpeters	who	delivered	a	further	long
blast	that	reverberated	around	the	chamber.	Humayun	approached	the	scales.	Stepping	on	to	one	of	the
golden	saucers,	he	felt	it	dip	to	the	floor	beneath	his	weight.	At	a	clap	of	Kasim’s	hands,	attendants
began	to	pile	box	after	box	of	gems	on	to	the	other	saucer	until	slowly,	to	the	sonorous	beating	of
drums,	 Humayun	 began	 to	 rise	 off	 the	 floor.	 When,	 finally,	 the	 scales	 were	 in	 equilibrium,	 the
trumpets	sounded	once	more.
Opening	a	book	bound	in	red	leather,	Kasim	began	to	read.	‘His	Imperial	Highness,	Humayun,	has
in	 his	 infinite	 generosity	 decreed	 that	 these	 gems	 be	 shared	 among	 his	 courtiers	 and	 loyal	 subjects
who	are	listed	here.’	Slowly,	portentously,	he	intoned	name	after	name.	Humayun	saw	the	smiles	of
gratification	–	greed	even.
And	so	it	went	on.	Next	Humayun	was	weighed	against	the	bags	of	gold	and	silver	to	be	distributed
as	a	further	reward	to	his	commanders	and	then	against	the	silks,	brocades	and	spices	to	be	sent	to
leading	officials	and	subjects	in	other	cities	and	provinces.	Finally	he	ordered	grain	and	loaves	to	be
distributed	among	the	poor	as	a	reminder	that	the	emperor	thought	not	just	of	his	rich	and	important
subjects	but	of	all	his	people.
By	the	time	it	was	all	over	and	the	roars	of	thanks	and	acclamation	had	died	down,	Humayun’s	head
was	 aching.	 Court	 ceremonial	 –	 the	 messages	 it	 conveyed	 –	 was	 essential	 to	 the	 dynasty.	 He
understood	 that	 now,	 and	 that	 he	 must	 find	 further	 ways	 to	 awe	 his	 people,	 but	 he	 was	 relieved	 to
return	to	his	own	apartments	and	throw	off	his	heavy	robes.	As	his	attendants	dressed	him	in	a	simple
tunic	and	trousers	and	Jauhar	locked	away	his	jewels,	he	felt	a	need	to	be	alone,	to	have	time	to	think.
He’d	go	out	for	a	ride	along	the	banks	of	the	Jumna	where	the	air	would	be	cooler	than	the	stifling
atmosphere	here	in	the	fort.	Perhaps	on	his	return	he	would	visit	the	sweet-scented	haram	and	one	of
his	beautiful	young	concubines	who	inhabited	it.
‘Majesty,	 Her	 Highness	 Gulrukh	 begs	 a	 word	 with	 you.’	 A	 soft,	 oddly	 accented	 voice	 interrupted
his	thoughts.Turning,	Humayun	saw	a	dark-eyed	young	man	with	luxuriant	black	hair	curling	down	to
his	shoulders.	Humayun	did	not	recall	seeing	him	before.	He	looked	no	more	than	about	twenty	and
was	slender	and	supple.	His	arms	–	left	bare	by	his	embroidered	scarlet	waistcoat	–	were	smoothly
muscled.
‘What	is	your	name?’
‘Mehmed,	Majesty.’

‘And	you	serve	my	stepmother?’
Mehmed’s	amber	eyes	flickered.	‘Yes,	Majesty.’
‘Where	are	you	from?’
‘The	 Ottoman	 court	 in	 Istanbul.	 I	 came	 to	 Agra	 with	 my	 master,	 a	 spice	 merchant,	 but	 when	 he
departed	 I	 remained	 to	 seek	 my	 fortune	 here.	 I	 have	 been	 lucky	 enough	 to	 find	 favour	 with	 Her
Majesty.’
What	did	Gulrukh	want?	She	seldom	troubled	him.	Indeed,	since	the	death	of	his	father	and	his	halfbrothers’	conspiracy	he’d	barely	seen	her.	Never	before	had	she	asked	him	to	go	to	her.	Unsettled	by
her	request,	Humayun	reluctantly	decided	to	postpone	his	ride.	It	would	appear	courteous	to	go	to	her
straight	away,	and	the	sooner	he	went,	the	sooner	he’d	find	out	what	it	was	about.	‘Very	well;	take	me
to	your	mistress.’
Humayun	followed	Mehmed	out	of	his	chamber,	across	a	courtyard	and	up	a	flight	of	stairs	that	led
to	the	suites	of	rooms	overlooking	a	flower-filled	garden	where	the	senior	royal	women	–	except	for
Khanzada	 who	 preferred	 to	 live	 in	 another	 part	 of	 the	 fort	 –	 had	 their	 apartments.	 As	 befitted	 her
status	 as	 Babur ’s	 second	 wife	 and	 mother	 of	 two	 of	 his	 sons,	 Kamran	 and	 Askari,	 Gulrukh’s
apartments	 were	 grand.	 As	 they	 reached	 the	 silver-inlaid	 mulberry	 wood	 doors	 outside	 them,
attendants	swung	them	open	and	Humayun	entered.
‘You	are	kind	to	come	so	quickly,’	said	Gulrukh	in	her	rich,	warm	voice	–	easily	the	most	attractive
thing	about	her	–	as	she	came	towards	him.	‘I	did	not	expect	such	an	honour.’	Two	years	older	than
his	 own	 mother,	 Gulrukh	 was	 in	 her	 early	 forties	 but	 her	 sleek	 plumpness	 made	 her	 look	 younger.
Kamran	–	sinewy	as	a	mountain	cat	with	slit-like	green	eyes	–	had	inherited	his	looks	from	Babur,	not
from	her,	Humayun	thought.	But	Gulrukh’s	small	black	eyes	–	fixed	intently	on	his	face	–	were	just
like	Askari’s.
‘Please	–	won’t	you	rest?’	She	gestured	towards	a	red	silk	bolster	and	Humayun	sat	back	against	it.
‘I’ve	never	spoken	of	it	to	you	because	I	was	ashamed,	but	my	sons’	folly	in	plotting	against	you
caused	me	much	distress.	Your	father	–	may	his	soul	rest	in	peace	in	Paradise	–	chose	you	as	his	heir
and	 it	 was	 not	 for	 anyone	 to	 challenge.	 Believe	 me	 –	 I	 knew	 nothing	 of	 their	 rash	 and	 childish
scheming.	When	I	heard	what	they	had	done	I	was	terrified.	I	thought	you’d	have	them	executed.	I	was
about	 to	 come	 to	 you	 to	 plead	 for	 their	 lives.	 But	 then	 I	 heard	 of	 your	 generosity	 –	 how	 you	 had
raised	them	up	and	forgiven	them	and	appointed	them	to	govern	wealthy	provinces	.	.	.	I	have	long
wished	to	have	this	conversation	with	you	because	I	wished	to	thank	you	as	a	mother.	I	chose	today
because	it	is	the	third	anniversary	of	the	start	of	your	reign.	I	thought	it	auspicious	and	also	I	wanted
to	congratulate	you.	You	have	been	emperor	only	a	short	while	but	already	you’ve	achieved	much.’
‘I	 trust	 my	 brothers	 have	 learned	 their	 lesson	 and	 that	 they	 are	 finding	 fulfilment	 .	 .	 .’	 Humayun
shifted	 uneasily	 against	 the	 bolster,	 embarrassed	 and	 anxious	 to	 be	 gone.	 But,	 as	 he	 suspected,
Gulrukh	had	more	to	say.	She	moved	closer,	her	hennaed	fingers	clasped	over	her	breast.
‘I	have	a	favour	to	ask	of	you	though	I	hardly	dare	.	.	.’
Was	she	going	to	ask	him	to	recall	Kamran	and	Askari	to	court?	Humayun	felt	a	flash	of	irritation
as	he	waited	for	her	to	go	on.
‘If	you	grant	my	wish	it	will	give	me	much	pleasure.’	Gulrukh	was	seemingly	undisturbed	by	his
silence.	‘To	celebrate	your	victory	over	Gujarat,	I	wish	to	hold	a	feast	for	you.	Your	mother	and	aunt
and	the	other	royal	women	will	also	be	my	guests.	Let	me	do	this	for	you	and	I	will	know	that	you
have	truly	forgiven	my	sons	and	that	harmony	has	returned	to	Babur ’s	family.’
Humayun	 felt	 himself	 relax.	 So	 that	 was	 all	 she	 wanted	 –	 no	 tearful	 pleading	 about	 her	 sons
returning	to	Agra	.	.	.	just	a	celebration.	He	bowed	his	head,	signifying	his	acceptance	of	Gulrukh’s

request,	and	after	a	final	exchange	of	graceful	courtesies	left	her.
Abandoning	thoughts	of	his	ride,	he	decided	instead	to	visit	his	mother.	As	he	made	for	Maham’s
apartments,	he	passed	what	had	been	Dildar ’s	rooms.	He	had	been	very	young	–	only	ten	or	eleven	–
when	Babur	had	given	Hindal	to	Maham.	All	he	remembered	was	his	mother	calling	to	him	to	look	at
the	baby	she	was	holding	in	her	arms.	‘See,	you	have	a	new	brother,’	she	had	said.	Puzzled,	Humayun
had	stared	down	at	the	bawling	infant	that	he	knew	was	not	his	mother ’s	but	another	woman’s	.	.	.
At	the	time	he’d	dismissed	it	from	his	mind.	Growing	up	in	Kabul,	learning	to	fight	with	a	sword
and	fire	off	thirty	arrows	a	minute	and	play	polo	had	been	what	mattered.	Only	later	had	he	come	to
realise	that	giving	Hindal	to	Maham	had	been	one	of	the	few	acts	of	weakness	of	his	father ’s	life	–
albeit	done	out	of	love.
What	 good	 had	 it	 done?	 It	 had	 soothed	 Maham’s	 grief	 but	 it	 had	 nourished	 discord	 within	 the
family.	 In	 the	 early	 years	 she	 had	 jealously	 guarded	 Hindal,	 keeping	 him	 away	 from	 Dildar.	 But	 as
Hindal	had	grown	older	and	learned	who	his	true	mother	was,	inevitably	he	had	turned	from	Maham.
Perhaps	 that	 was	 why,	 young	 as	 he	 was,	 Hindal	 had	 joined	 Kamran	 and	 Askari’s	 plot	 against	 him.
Perhaps	it	was	his	revenge	for	that	day	when	he	had	been	torn	from	Dildar ’s	arms.
What	of	Dildar	herself?	What	would	have	been	in	her	mind	all	those	years?	At	least	she	had	had
Gulbadan	to	console	her	.	.	.	But	when	she	was	born,	had	Dildar	feared	that	Maham	would	try	to	take
her	also?	Humayun	shook	himself.	He	would	never	know.	Dildar	was	dead	now.	Maham	never	spoke
of	these	things	and	he	was	reluctant	even	to	ask	Khanzada.The	world	of	women	could	be	a	dark	and
difficult	place.	In	comparison	the	world	of	men	with	all	its	battles	and	conflicts,	where	disputes	could
be	settled	with	fists	or	the	slash	of	a	blade,	seemed	cleaner	and	easier.

Beneath	an	almost	golden	moon,	the	courtyard	which	Gulrukh	had	chosen	for	her	party	was	lit	by	the
soft	radiance	of	hundreds	of	wicks	burning	in	pools	of	scented	oil	in	copper	bowls	or	diyas.	Against
one	wall	of	the	courtyard	was	a	large	tent	–	conical	in	shape	like	those	of	the	Moghuls’	homelands.
But	instead	of	the	sturdy	sticks	locked	together	to	withstand	the	shrieking	winter	winds	and	covered	in
thick	felt,	Humayun	could	see	that	the	framework	was	of	slender	silver	rods	covered	with	flowered
silk.	The	silk	was	caught	back	on	each	side	by	pearl-sewn	ribbons	so	the	entrance	was	half	open	to	the
warm	night	air.
Two	of	Gulrukh’s	women	led	him	to	the	tent	where	she	was	waiting,	wearing	a	robe	of	dark	purple
and	a	shawl	of	the	same	colour,	shot	through	with	silver	thread,	that	covered	her	head	and	shoulders.
But	her	young	attendants	were	dressed	in	semi-transparent	muslins.	As	they	moved	in	the	flickering
light,	Humayun	caught	the	curve	of	slender	waists,	firm	breasts	and	voluptuously	rounded	hips	and
buttocks.	Jewels	flashed	in	their	navels	and	their	dark	hair	was	interwoven	with	white	jasmine	flowers
in	the	Hindustani	fashion.
‘Please	.	.	.’	Gulrukh	indicated	a	low,	velvet-covered	chair.	As	Humayun	took	his	place,	one	of	her
women	 knelt	 before	 him	 with	 an	 enamelled	 golden	 ewer	 of	 cool,	 sandalwood-scented	 water	 while
another	brought	a	cotton	cloth.	Humayun	held	out	his	hands	and	the	first	attendant	let	the	water	flow
over	them.	Slowly,	caressingly,	the	second	dried	them.
Puzzled,	 Humayun	 looked	 around	 for	 his	 mother	 and	 Khanzada	 and	 the	 other	 royal	 women,	 but
apart	from	Gulrukh	and	her	servants,	they	seemed	to	be	alone.

‘I	thought	a	smaller,	less	formal	celebration	might	be	more	to	your	taste,’	Gulrukh	said.	‘I	am	your
only	hostess	but	hope	you	will	pardon	my	deficiencies.’
Humayun	sat	up	a	little	straighter	in	his	chair,	eyes	watchful.	What	was	Gulrukh	doing?	As	she	must
know,	he’d	accepted	her	invitation	only	out	of	courtesy	–	nothing	more	–	yet	she	seemed	to	be	trying
to	turn	the	occasion	into	something	intimate.	For	a	moment	he	feared	she	might	be	trying	to	seduce
him,	either	herself	or	through	her	attendants.
‘I	have	prepared	a	surprise	for	you.’
Humayun	 looked	 around,	 half	 expecting	 to	 hear	 the	 clash	 of	 cymbals	 and	 bells	 and	 see	 the	 usual
line	of	undulating	dancing	girls	or	tumbling	jugglers,	acrobats	and	fire-eaters	that	were	the	staples	of
court	 entertainment.	 Instead,	 a	 willowy	 form	 emerged	 from	 the	 shadows	 to	 his	 right.	 As	 the	 figure
came	towards	him,	Humayun	recognised	the	pale	face	of	Mehmed.	The	Turk	knelt	before	Humayun
and	held	out	a	goblet	of	what	looked	like	red	wine.
‘What	is	it?’	Humayun	ignored	Mehmed	and	turned	to	Gulrukh.
‘A	special	blend	of	heady	opium	from	south	of	Kabul	and	the	red	wine	of	Ghazni,	mixed	by	my
own	hand	to	a	recipe	handed	down	within	my	family.	Sometimes	–	when	he	was	weary	–	I	made	it	for
your	father.	He	said	that	it	transported	him	.	.	.’
As	Humayun	gazed	at	the	dark,	almost	purple	liquid,	a	series	of	images	flashed	through	his	mind	–
of	Babur,	high	with	joy	after	victory	on	the	battlefield	and	calling	for	opium	to	take	him	to	yet	further
heights	.	.	.	He’d	seen	the	ecstasy	on	his	father ’s	face,	heard	his	delighted	murmurings.	Of	course,	he
was	no	stranger	to	opium	himself.	It	had	numbed	his	grief	at	his	father ’s	death.	Later,	he’d	discovered
the	 sensual	 languor	 that	 a	 few	 pellets	 dissolved	 in	 rosewater	 could	 induce	 and	 that	 heightened	 the
pleasures	of	love-making.	But	seldom	had	he	been	as	completely	transported	as	Babur	had	seemed	to
be.
‘Do	 you	 wish	 to	 send	 for	 your	 food	 taster	 first?’	 Gulrukh	 asked.	 But	 before	 Humayun	 could
answer,	 she	 stepped	 forward,	 took	 the	 goblet	 from	 Mehmed	 and	 raised	 it	 to	 her	 own	 full	 lips.	 Her
plump	throat	quivered	as	she	swallowed	and	Humayun	saw	her	raise	her	hand	to	catch	a	few	beads	of
liquid	that	had	trickled	down	her	chin	and	then	delicately	lick	her	fingers	clean.
‘Majesty,	drink.	It	is	my	gift	to	you	.	.	.’	Humayun	hesitated	then	took	the	goblet,	still	three-quarters
full,	 and	 raising	 it	 to	 his	 lips	 took	 a	 sip.	 The	 wine	 tasted	 of	 something	 fiery	 –	 Gulrukh	 must	 have
spiced	it	to	mask	the	faint	bitterness	of	the	opium.	Humayun	drank	again,	this	time	more	deeply,	and
felt	 a	 soft	 warmth	 start	 to	 spread	 through	 his	 body	 –	 first	 down	 his	 throat,	 then	 to	 the	 pit	 of	 his
stomach.	 After	 a	 few	 moments,	 his	 limbs	 were	 beginning	 to	 grow	 heavy.	 A	 delicious,	 irresistible
lethargy	was	taking	possession	of	him	and	Humayun	gave	himself	up	to	it	like	a	weary	man	who	sees
a	soft	bed	laid	ready	for	him	and	cannot	wait	to	lie	on	it.
He	swallowed	what	was	left	in	the	goblet.	His	eyes	were	already	half	closed	as	he	felt	soft	hands
take	the	cup	from	him,	raise	him	out	of	the	chair	and	guide	him	to	a	soft	mattress,	where	they	laid	him
down.	Someone	placed	a	cushion	under	his	head	and	gently	wiped	his	face	with	scented	water.	It	felt
good	 and	 he	 stretched	 luxuriously.	 Soon	 his	 body	 began	 to	 feel	 as	 if	 it	 was	 dissolving	 into
nothingness.	He	could	no	longer	feel	any	part	of	it	but	what	did	it	matter?	His	spirit	–	the	very	essence
of	 who	 he	 was,	 not	 the	 prone,	 earth-bound	 creature	 he	 had	 once	 been	 –	 seemed	 to	 be	 streaming	 up
into	the	star-splashed	heavens	that	were	suddenly	opening	up	before	him.
Released	from	his	body,	Humayun	felt	himself	soaring	like	a	comet.	Beneath	him,	he	could	make
out	 the	 waters	 of	 the	 Jumna	 flowing	 dark	 as	 Gulrukh’s	 cup	 of	 wine	 beneath	 the	 battlements	 of	 the
Agra	 fort.	 Beyond	 in	 every	 direction	 stretched	 the	 flat,	 seemingly	 limitless	 plains	 of	 Hindustan,	 the
warm	 darkness	 pierced,	 now	 here,	 now	 there,	 glow-worm	 like	 by	 the	 dung	 fires	 burning	 in	 the

villages	 of	 his	 new	 subjects.	 Stretched	 on	 their	 simple	 beds	 beneath	 the	 acacia	 and	 banyan	 trees
outside	 their	 mud-baked	 houses,	 they	 were	 dreaming	 the	 dreams	 of	 people	 whose	 lives	 were
governed	by	the	seasons,	when	to	sow	and	when	to	reap,	and	whose	greatest	worry	was	the	health	of
their	bullocks	and	how	they	would	pull	at	the	plough.
As	his	spirit	flew	onwards,	Humayun	could	see	the	sun	beginning	to	rise.	A	pool	of	orange	light
was	seeping	over	the	rim	of	the	world	bringing	warmth	and	renewal.	And	what	was	that	he	could	see
beneath	 him	 now	 in	 the	 pale	 apricot	 glow?	 –	 the	 palaces,	 towers	 and	 grandiose	 royal	 tombs	 of	 the
great	 city	 of	 Delhi,	 once	 capital	 to	 the	 Lodi	 sultans	 but	 humbled	 by	 the	 Moghuls.	 Still	 Humayun’s
unleashed	spirit	flew	on,	leaving	the	heat	and	dust	of	Hindustan	behind.	Below	him	now	were	the	chill
waters	of	the	Indus.	Beyond	lay	the	bleached,	bone-hard	hills	and	twisting	passes	leading	to	Kabul	and
on	 towards	 the	 hard,	 diamond-bright	 peaks	 of	 the	 Hindu	 Kush,	 gateway	 to	 the	 Moghuls’	 ancestral
homelands	on	the	plains	of	central	Asia.	What	a	long	way	they	had	travelled.	What	glories	they	had
achieved.	And	what	marvels	still	awaited	.	.	.	To	what	new	heights	could	they	ascend	with	the	help	of
visions	 such	 as	 these?	 Above	 Humayun’s	 still	 exultantly	 soaring	 spirit	 the	 sky	 glowed	 like	 molten
gold,	embracing	the	entire	world.

Chapter	5
The	Tyranny	of	the	Stars
‘I	have	decided	to	change	how	I	govern.	The	imperial	court	is	not	as	I	would	wish	it.’
Humayun’s	 counsellors,	 sitting	 cross-legged	 in	 a	 semicircle	 before	 his	 gilded	 throne,	 stared	 in
surprise.	He	saw	Baisanghar	and	Kasim	exchange	puzzled	glances	before	returning	their	attention	to
him.	No	matter.	Soon	they	would	understand	the	wonderful	ideas	that	had	come	to	him	in	his	opiuminduced	dreams	when,	released	from	the	everyday	obligations	of	ruling,	his	thoughts	seemed	to	flow
with	 a	 crystal	 clarity.	 Everything	 that	 had	 been	 revealed	 to	 him	 had	 a	 purpose.	 Everything	 he	 had
dreamed	was	indeed	written	in	the	stars	.	.	.
Humayun	raised	his	right	hand	and	his	astrologer	Sharaf,	a	thin,	elderly,	beak-nosed	man	dressed
in	 sweeping	 brown	 robes,	 stepped	 forward	 holding	 a	 heavy	 leather-bound	 volume	 in	 his	 thickly
veined	 hands.	 With	 a	 grunt	 of	 relief,	 he	 laid	 it	 on	 the	 white	 marble	 table	 inlaid	 with	 images	 of	 the
planets	that	Humayun	had	had	placed	before	his	golden	throne.
Humayun	rose	and	leafed	through	until	he	found	the	page	he	was	seeking.	There	in	the	hand	of	his
ancestor,	 the	 great	 astronomer	 Ulugh	 Beg	 –	 Timur ’s	 grandson	 –	 was	 a	 chart	 depicting	 the	 celestial
movements	 of	 the	 planets	 and	 the	 stars.	 As	 he	 stared	 at	 the	 delicate	 drawing,	 the	 heavenly	 bodies
seemed	to	start	moving	in	stately	progress,	slowly	at	first	but	then	gathering	momentum	so	that	they
appeared	to	be	chasing	one	another.	He	blinked	and	looked	again	and	the	page	was	still	.	.	.	It	must	be
the	 effect	 of	 the	 opium	 he	 had	 taken	 last	 night.The	 now	 familiar	 concoction	 mixed	 for	 him	 by
Gulrukh	and	carried	to	his	apartments	by	Mehmed	must	have	been	especially	potent.	He’d	not	woken
until	the	sun	was	a	spear ’s	length	above	the	horizon	and	had	chided	Jauhar	for	not	rousing	him	earlier
on	a	day	when	he	would	reveal	his	insights.
Suddenly	 Humayun	 became	 conscious	 of	 the	 eyes	 of	 his	 counsellors	 watching	 him	 intently.	 He’d
almost	 forgotten	 they	 were	 there.	 He	 drew	 himself	 up.	 ‘You	 know	 I	 have	 studied	 the	 never-ending
motion	of	the	planets	and	stars	as	did	my	ancestor	Ulugh	Beg.	After	much	thought	I	have	concluded
that	we	can	go	beyond	his	researches	and	that	the	star	charts	and	tables	and	the	records	of	events	long
past,	when	interpreted	with	the	aid	of	learned	astrologers	and	one’s	own	power	of	pure	thought,	can
provide	a	framework	for	living	and	even	for	ruling.’
By	his	counsellors’	expressions,	Humayun	saw	they	still	had	no	idea	what	he	was	talking	about.	But
then	how	could	they?	They	had	not	seen	what	he	had	seen	when	–	set	free	by	Gulrukh’s	potions	–	his
mind	had	travelled	through	realms	they	could	not	begin	to	imagine.	But	they	were	about	to	learn	of
the	great	improvements	he	planned	to	make	to	his	government.
‘I	have	come	to	realise	that	we	can	learn	from	the	planets	and	the	stars.	Under	God	Almighty	they
govern	us,	but	like	a	good	master	they	can	also	teach	us.	Henceforward,	I	will	only	deal	with	certain
matters	on	the	days	the	stars	designate	as	auspicious	for	them	.	.	.	and	I	will	dress	appropriately.	The
stars	 tell	 us	 that	 today,	 Sunday,	 is	 governed	 by	 the	 sun	 whose	 golden	 rays	 regulate	 sovereignty.
Therefore	on	Sundays,	clad	in	bright	yellow,	I	will	deal	with	affairs	of	state.	On	Mondays	–	the	day	of
the	Moon	and	of	tranquillity	–	I	will	be	at	leisure	and	wear	green,	the	colour	of	quiet	reflection.	On

Tuesdays	–	the	day	of	the	planet	Mars,	patron	of	soldiers	–	I	will	devote	myself	to	matters	of	war	and
of	justice.	I	will	wear	the	red	raiment	of	Mars,	the	colour	of	wrath	and	vengeance,	and	dispense	both
punishment	and	reward	with	lightning	speed.	Treasurers	with	purses	will	stand	ready	to	reward	any	I
deem	worthy	while	guards	in	coats	of	mail	and	blood-red	turbans	will	stand,	axe	in	hand,	before	my
throne	to	punish	culprits	instantly	.	.	.
‘Saturdays	–	the	day	of	the	planet	Saturn	–	and	Thursdays	–	the	day	of	the	planet	Jupiter	–	will	be
devoted	to	religion	and	learning,	and	Wednesday	–	the	day	of	the	planet	Mercury	–	will	be	a	day	of
joy	 when	 we	 will	 make	 merry	 and	 wear	 purple.	 And	 on	 Fridays,	 dressed	 in	 blue	 like	 the	 allembracing	sky,	I	will	deal	with	any	matter.	Any	man	or	woman	–	no	matter	how	humble	or	poor	–
may	approach	me	.	.	.	All	they	need	do	is	beat	the	Drum	of	Justice	that	I	have	ordered	be	set	up	outside
my	audience	chamber.’
Humayun	paused	again.	Kasim,	who	had	been	recording	his	pronouncements	in	his	ledger,	seemed
to	have	halted	in	mid-sentence	while	Baisanghar	was	pulling	with	the	fingers	of	his	left	hand	at	the
metal	 hook	 that	 many	 years	 ago	 had	 replaced	 his	 severed	 right	 hand.	 The	 rest	 of	 his	 counsellors
looked	stunned	by	his	pronouncement	but	they	would	come	to	accept	his	insights.	In	the	mechanical
movements	 of	 the	 stars	 and	 planets	 everything	 was	 in	 its	 properly	 ordained	 place.	 And	 that	 was
exactly	how	the	government	of	a	great	empire	should	be.	Everything	must	be	done	in	the	appropriate
way	and	at	the	appropriate	time	.	.	.
After	a	minute	or	two	Humayun	continued	slowly,	his	tone	flat	and	formal.	‘I	have	also	decided	to
reorganise	my	offices	of	government	according	to	which	of	the	four	main	elements	–	fire,	air,	water
or	earth	–	dominate	them.	The	Office	of	Fire	will	be	responsible	for	my	armies.	The	Office	of	Air
will	 deal	 with	 matters	 of	 the	 imperial	 kitchen,	 stables	 and	 wardrobe.	 The	 Office	 of	 Water	 will	 be
responsible	for	everything	to	do	with	the	rivers	and	canals	of	my	empire,	for	irrigation	and	for	the
imperial	wine	cellars.	And	the	Office	of	Earth	will	deal	with	agriculture	and	grants	of	land.	And	all
actions,	 all	 decisions,	 must	 be	 taken	 in	 accordance	 with	 the	 guidance	 written	 in	 the	 stars	 to	 ensure
everything	is	done	in	the	most	auspicious	way	.	.	.
‘And	you	–	my	counsellors	and	courtiers	–	you	will	also	have	your	place	in	this	new	structure.	The
stars	tell	us	there	are	three	classes	of	men.	All	of	you,	my	nobles	and	officials	and	commanders,	are
Officers	of	State.	But	there	are	two	other	classes	essential	to	the	well-being	and	health	of	the	empire	–
Good	 Men,	 which	 includes	 our	 religious	 leaders,	 philosophers	 and	 astrologers,	 and	 Officers	 of
Pleasure	 who	 are	 the	 poets,	 singers,	 musicians,	 dancers	 and	 artists	 who	 beautify	 and	 embellish	 our
lives,	just	as	the	stars	decorate	the	sky.	Each	of	these	three	classes	will	be	divided	into	twelve	ranks
and	each	rank	will	have	three	grades	–	high,	middle	and	low.	In	due	course	I	will	inform	you	to	which
rank	and	grade	I	have	assigned	you	.	.	.	Now,	leave	me.	I	have	much	to	think	upon.’
Alone	 in	 his	 audience	 chamber	 except	 for	 Sharaf,	 Humayun	 again	 examined	 the	 star	 charts	 of
Ulugh	Beg,	losing	all	sense	of	time	as	one	hour	flowed	into	the	next.	Not	till	the	sun	was	beginning	to
sink,	sending	purple	shadows	creeping	over	the	Agra	fort,	did	Humayun	lift	his	eyes	from	the	pages.
As	he	returned	to	his	apartments	a	yearning	for	the	dark	opium-infused	wine	that	unleashed	his	soul
again	welled	up	inside	him	and	he	walked	more	quickly.

‘Kasim,	I	did	not	realise	how	many	hours	had	passed.’	Humayun	rubbed	his	eyes	and	pushed	himself
upright	from	where	he	had	been	slumped	on	a	purple-silk-covered	divan.	It	was	embroidered	in	gold
thread	with	a	network	of	stars	and	Humayun	believed	that,	lying	on	it,	he	thought	more	deeply.	‘Are
the	council	still	assembled?	What	about	the	envoy	from	my	governor	in	Bengal?’
‘The	council	broke	up	a	long	time	ago.	As	for	the	envoy,	you	had	already	postponed	your	meeting
with	him	several	times	because	you	did	not	consider	the	days	well	suited	to	such	discussion	and	once
–	forgive	me	for	mentioning	it,	Majesty	–	when	you	banished	him	from	your	presence	for	entering
the	audience	chamber	by	the	wrong	door,	thus	rendering	a	discussion	that	day	too	inauspicious.	The
season	for	travel	down	the	Jumna	and	the	Ganges	to	Bengal	is	coming	to	an	end	and	he	could	wait	no
longer.	Therefore	Baisanghar	and	I	took	the	great	liberty	of	offering	guidance	on	your	behalf	on	the
level	of	taxes	to	be	imposed	and	the	number	of	troops	to	be	raised.	He	went	aboard	his	boat	and	the
anchor	was	weighed	two	hours	ago.’
For	a	moment	Humayun	felt	anger	that	the	two	old	men	had	usurped	his	authority.
‘Majesty,	we	can	of	course	send	another	boat	after	him	if	you	disagree	with	what	we	said.’
Kasim	 must	 have	 sensed	 his	 annoyance,	 thought	 Humayun.	 He’d	 been	 unjust.The	 envoy	 was	 both
garrulous	and	tedious.	He	had	delayed	his	audience	with	him	deliberately,	sometimes	using	excuses
which	 seemed	 trifling	 even	 to	 himself.	 Humayun	 spoke	 softly.	 ‘I’m	 sure	 that	 when	 I	 hear	 in	 the
morning	 what	 you	 and	 Baisanghar	 suggested	 I	 will	 agree,	 Kasim.	 Now	 leave	 me	 to	 rest	 and	 relax
once	more.’
Kasim	seemed	reluctant	to	do	so,	shifting	from	foot	to	foot	and	fiddling	with	a	golden	tassel	on	his
robe.	Then	he	made	his	mind	up	and	spoke.	‘Majesty,	you	know	for	how	long	I	have	loyally	served
you	and	your	father.’
‘Yes,	and	I	appreciate	it.’
‘Therefore	may	I	take	advantage	of	my	years	of	experience	to	proffer	you	some	advice?	Majesty,
you	indulge	in	opium.	Your	father	enjoyed	it	too,	as	well	as	wine	and	bhang	–	marijuana.’
‘So?’
‘Some	of	us	have	more	tolerance	of	such	things	than	others.	Even	when	I	was	young,	bhang	could
prevent	me	from	working	for	days	so	I	abstained	from	all	such	potions	despite	your	father ’s	urgings.
Perhaps	they	have	more	effect	on	Your	Majesty	than	you	realise.’
‘No,	Kasim.	They	help	me	to	think	and	to	relax.	Is	that	all	you’ve	got	to	say?’
‘Yes,	 but	 please	 remember	 even	 your	 father	 did	 not	 indulge	 every	 day,	 particularly	 when	 he	 had
important	business	to	transact.’As	Kasim	bowed	and	turned	to	leave,	Humayun	saw	an	expression	of
deep	anxiety	on	his	lined	face.	His	concern	was	genuine.	It	had	cost	the	self-effacing,	reticent	old	man
much	to	make	his	little	speech.	Humayun	could	not	be	angry	with	him.
‘I	will	give	thought	to	your	words,	I	assure	you.’

Humayun	 looked	 with	 satisfaction	 at	 the	 huge	 circular	 carpet	 woven	 in	 silk	 blue	 as	 the	 sky	 that
attendants	 were	 unrolling	 before	 his	 throne.	 The	 series	 of	 circles	 –	 outlined	 on	 the	 carpet	 in	 red,
yellow,	 purple	 and	 green	 chain	 stitch	 and	 representing	 the	 planets	 –	 were	 placed	 exactly	 as	 he	 had
ordered.	He	would	reward	the	weavers	well	for	their	skill	and	the	speed	with	which	they	had	brought
his	‘Carpet	of	Council’	to	life.

The	 idea	 had	 come	 to	 him	 only	 a	 month	 ago	 during	 a	 particularly	 vivid	 dream	 –	 indeed	 his
drugged	sleep	after	drinking	Gulrukh’s	opium	and	wine	seemed	to	be	growing	ever	more	marvellous
and	revelatory.	One	of	the	stars	had	actually	seemed	to	speak	to	him,	telling	him	to	make	such	a	carpet
so	 that	 –	 when	 advising	 him	 –	 his	 counsellors	 could	 stand	 on	 the	 planet	 most	 appropriate	 to	 the
business	in	hand.	He	had	had	the	weavers	work	on	the	carpet	in	secret,	taking	it	in	turns	so	that	the
looms	were	moving	every	hour	of	the	day.	He	had	not	spoken	of	the	carpet	to	anyone	except	Sharaf	–
not	Baisanghar,	nor	Kasim	nor	even	Khanzada.	Let	it	be	a	surprise	to	them	as	it	would	be	to	the	rest	of
his	council,	whom	he’d	summoned	to	join	him	here.
Before	long	his	counsellors	were	assembled.	As	it	was	a	Wednesday,	their	robes,	like	Humayun’s,
were	a	bright	purple	and	their	sashes	orange.	Humayun	smiled	to	see	their	curious	glances	fall	on	the
shimmering	 circle	 of	 pale	 blue	 spread	 out	 before	 him.	 Baba	 Yasaval	 was	 scrutinising	 it	 in	 frank
puzzlement.
‘I	 have	 summoned	 you	 here	 to	 see	 this	 wondrous	 carpet.	 It	 represents	 the	 sky	 above	 us.	 These
circles	are	the	planets	–	see,	here	is	Mars	and	Venus	and	Jupiter	–	and,	over	here,	we	have	the	moon.
When	 you	 have	 something	 you	 wish	 to	 say	 to	 me,	 you	 must	 stand	 on	 the	 appropriate	 circle.	 For
example,	 if	 you	 wish	 to	 speak	 to	 me	 of	 army	 matters,	 you	 must	 stand	 on	 Mars.	 That	 will	 help	 the
planets	to	guide	you	.	.	.’
Humayun	looked	around	but	suddenly	found	the	faces	of	his	counsellors	hard	to	distinguish	–	was
that	Kasim,	forehead	wrinkled	in	thought,	over	there?	.	.	.	He	couldn’t	be	sure	.	.	.	everything	around
him	seemed	a	little	blurred.	Maybe	his	eyes	were	weary	from	studying	the	star	charts	or	straining	into
the	heavens	when,	at	night,	he	climbed	to	the	battlements	of	the	Agra	fort	to	contemplate	the	stars.
But	after	a	moment	everything	slid	back	into	focus.	Yes,	that	was	Kasim	watching	him	thoughtfully
and	 there	 was	 Baba	 Yasaval	 looking	 nonplussed,	 perhaps	 unable	 to	 comprehend	 the	 power	 of	 the
carpet’s	symbolism.	But	what	about	Asaf	Beg?	He	seemed	to	be	laughing	–	a	disdainful	curl	to	his	lip
–	as	he	surveyed	Humayun’s	carpet.	His	expression	as	he	raised	his	face	to	look	full	into	Humayun’s
seemed	more	than	a	little	mocking.	Anger	ran	like	a	flame	through	Humayun.	How	dare	this	ignorant
petty	chieftain	from	Kabul	make	fun	of	his	emperor?
‘You	there!’	Humayun	rose	and	pointed	a	trembling	finger	towards	Asaf	Beg.	‘You	are	impudent
and	you	will	pay	for	your	disrespect.	Guards	–	take	him	into	the	courtyard	outside	and	give	him	fifty
lashes.	Think	yourself	lucky,	Asaf	Beg,	that	you	are	losing	only	the	skin	off	your	back	and	not	your
head.’
There	was	a	collective	gasp	followed	by	shocked	silence.	Then	a	voice	spoke.	‘Majesty	.	.	.’
Humayun	 swung	 round,	 determined	 to	 tolerate	 neither	 contradiction	 nor	 criticism,	 but	 saw	 that	 it
was	 Kasim	 who	 had	 spoken.	 At	 the	 real	 concern	 showing	 again	 on	 the	 face	 of	 the	 man	 whom	 he
trusted	 and	 who	 had	 served	 both	 his	 father	 and	 himself	 well,	 Humayun’s	 rage	 began	 to	 ebb.	 At	 the
same	 time	 he	 realised	 his	 breathing	 was	 ragged,	 his	 pulse	 was	 racing	 and	 his	 forehead	 was	 beaded
with	sweat.
‘What	is	it,	Kasim?’
‘I’m	sure	that	Asaf	Beg	meant	you	no	disrespect,	Majesty	.	.	.	I	beg	you	to	reconsider.’
Asaf	Beg,	pale	and	with	no	trace	of	a	smile	now	on	his	wide	mouth	and	usually	cheerful	face,	was
gazing	pleadingly	at	Humayun.	To	be	publicly	flogged	would	bring	terrible	shame	on	him	and	all	his
clan,	 Humayun	 knew.	 He	 also	 recalled	 Asaf	 Beg’s	 bravery	 in	 battle.	 He	 was	 already	 regretting	 his
action.
‘Kasim	–	you	speak	well,	as	always.	Asaf	Beg,	I	pardon	you.	But	do	not	test	my	patience	again	or
you	will	not	find	me	so	merciful.’	Humayun	rose	–	the	signal	for	his	council	to	disperse,	which	they

seemed	to	do	more	quickly	than	usual.	As	he	sat	down	again	Humayun	found	himself	shaking.	The
carpet	had	lost	its	lustrous	charm.	It	was	growing	late.	Perhaps	he	should	return	to	his	apartments	to
rest.	But	as	he	entered	them,	he	was	surprised	to	find	Khanzada	waiting	for	him.
‘What	is	it,	Aunt?’
‘Dismiss	your	attendants.	I	must	speak	with	you	alone.’
Humayun	 gestured	 to	 his	 servants	 and	 to	 Jauhar	 to	 leave.	 The	 double	 doors	 had	 barely	 closed
behind	them	before	she	began.	‘I	witnessed	what	happened	at	the	council	meeting	from	behind	the	jali
screen.	Humayun	.	.	.	I	had	not	thought	it	possible	.	.	.	first	you	behaved	like	a	man	in	a	trance	and	then
like	a	lunatic	.	.	.’
‘My	council	do	not	always	understand	that	what	I	am	doing	is	for	the	best,	but	you	should.	It	was
you	who	first	taught	me	the	value	of	display	to	a	ruler	–	you	who	suggested	the	weighing	ceremony
and	encouraged	me	to	use	ritual	as	an	aid	to	governing	.	.	.’
‘But	not	to	the	exclusion	of	humanity	or	reason	.	.	.’
‘Under	the	tutelage	of	the	stars	I	have	devised	new	patterns	and	new	procedures.	Government	will
become	simpler.	If	my	counsellors	and	advisers	follow	my	guidance	the	tedium	of	time	spent	in	the
audience	 chamber	 will	 be	 reduced,	 leaving	 me	 free	 for	 the	 further	 exploration	 of	 the	 unplumbed
depths	of	the	heavens.’
‘Forget	the	stars.You’re	obsessed	with	them	and	are	losing	your	hold	on	reality.	I’ve	tried	to	warn
you	before	but	you	wouldn’t	hear.	Now	you	must	or	you	risk	losing	everything	you’ve	striven	for	–
everything	your	father	achieved	.	.	.	Humayun,	are	you	even	listening	to	me?’
‘Yes,	I	am.’	But	Khanzada	was	wrong,	he	was	thinking	.	.	.	only	in	the	patterns	of	the	stars	and	the
planets	 could	 he	 find	 the	 answers	 to	 other	 questions	 that	 had	 long	 fascinated	 and	 tormented	 him.
Whether	everything	was	somehow	predestined	by	the	heavens?	Whether	his	father ’s	early	death	had
been	part	of	some	greater	plan?	How	much	of	a	man’s	destiny	rested	in	his	own	hands?	How	much
was	preordained,	like	the	position	and	the	family	into	which	he	had	been	born	and	the	responsibilities
and	privileges	that	flowed	from	it?	And	how	could	he	know	.	.	.	?	An	old	Buddhist	monk	whom	he	had
visited	in	his	youth	in	the	monk’s	solitary	retreat	by	one	of	the	great	statues	of	the	Buddha	–	cut	into
the	cliffs	of	the	Bamian	Valley	a	hundred	miles	west	of	Kabul	–	had	told	him	that,	given	the	precise
date,	time	and	place	of	his	birth,	he	could	foretell	not	only	the	course	of	his	life	but	as	what	animal	he
would	 be	 reincarnated	 in	 the	 next.	 The	 idea	 of	 reincarnation	 was	 nonsense	 to	 him,	 but	 what	 of	 the
rest?	Of	one	thing	he	was	already	sure	–	that	with	the	star	charts	and	tables	and	records	of	events	long
past	that	he	spent	so	much	time	studying	and	that	in	his	opium-fuelled	dreams	came	alive	for	him,	he
could	create	a	framework	for	living	and	ruling	and	was	already	well	along	the	way	to	doing	so.
‘Humayun!	Won’t	you	even	answer	me?’
Khanzada’s	voice	seemed	to	be	coming	from	far	off	and	as	he	stared	at	her	she	seemed	to	diminish
in	stature,	becoming	a	little	doll	animatedly	waving	her	arms	and	waggling	her	head.	It	was	almost
comic.
‘You	 smile	 when	 I	 speak	 of	 the	 danger	 you	 are	 in	 .	 .	 .’	 Khanzada’s	 firm	 grip	 on	 his	 arm,	 the
sharpness	 of	 her	 nails	 digging	 into	 his	 flesh,	 brought	 him	 back	 to	 reality.	 ‘You	 will	 hear	 me	 out.
There	are	things	that	must	be	said	.	.	.	that	perhaps	only	I	can	say	.	.	.	but	remember	I	speak	only	from
love.’
‘Say	what	you	wish.’
‘Humayun,	you	spend	your	days	fuddled	with	opium.You	used	to	be	a	ruler,	a	warrior.What	are	you
now	but	a	dreamer,	a	fantasist?	I	never	thought	I’d	have	to	say	these	words	to	you	.	.	.	but	a	leader	must
be	strong,	he	must	be	decisive.	His	people	must	know	that	they	can	look	to	him	at	all	times.	You	know

that.	How	many	times	in	the	past	have	you	and	I	not	discussed	such	things?	Now	you	seldom	visit	me	.
.	 .	 And	 when	 I	 look	 around	 the	 court,	 I	 see	 expressions	 of	 fear	 and	 uncertainty	 and	 hear	 uneasy
laughter	 behind	 your	 back.	 Even	 to	 those	 who’ve	 known	 and	 served	 you	 long	 and	 loyally	 –	 like
Kasim	and	Baba	Yasaval	–	you’ve	become	like	a	stranger.	They	no	longer	have	confidence	in	your
judgement.	They	never	know	how	you	will	react	–	whether	you	will	approve	their	actions	or	whether
you	will	be	angry.	Sometimes	they	can	get	no	coherent	guidance	or	direction	from	you	for	hours	.	.	.
even	days	.	.	.’
Never	 before	 had	 Khanzada	 spoken	 to	 him	 in	 this	 way	 and	 he	 felt	 resentment	 stir.	 ‘If	 you	 or	 my
courtiers	disapprove	of	my	decisions	and	of	how	I	choose	to	govern	my	empire,	it	is	because	you	do
not	understand.	But	in	time	you	will	come	to	see	that	everything	I’m	doing	is	for	the	best.’
‘Time	 is	 not	 on	 your	 side.	 If	 you	 do	 not	 rule	 as	 you	 should,	 the	 eyes	 of	 your	 nobles	 and
commanders	will	turn	to	your	half-brothers	–	to	Kamran	in	particular.	Think,	Humayun.	He’s	only	a
few	months	younger	than	you	and	has	already	proved	himself	an	able	warrior	and	a	strong	governor
of	 his	 province.	 Babur ’s	 blood	 and	 Timur ’s	 too	 flows	 through	 his	 veins	 just	 as	 it	 does	 through
yours.You	know	he	is	ambitious	–	ambitious	enough	to	have	already	plotted	against	you.You	have	no
reason	to	think	he	won’t	do	so	again.	Hasn’t	it	occurred	to	you	to	wonder	why	Gulrukh	has	insinuated
herself	into	your	favour,	why	she	plies	you	with	that	brew	of	hers?	Instead	of	gazing	into	the	infinite
mysteries	 of	 the	 stars	 it	 better	 befits	 an	 emperor	 to	 peer	 deep	 into	 the	 minds	 of	 those	 around	 him.
Remember	what	I	once	told	you	.	.	.	always	to	look	for	the	motive.	Gulrukh	could	never	encourage
open	revolt	against	you	in	favour	of	Kamran	and	Askari	.	.	.	how	much	cleverer	and	more	subtle	of
her	to	undermine	you	gradually	with	opium.	And	as	your	powers	weaken	and	fade	and	your	subjects
begin	to	despise	the	ruler	they	once	admired,	what	would	be	more	natural	than	for	them	to	turn	to	one
of	her	sons?	Remember	also	the	fate	of	Ulugh	Beg.	When	he	–	like	you	–	became	obsessed	with	the
stars	and	what	they	could	tell	him	about	the	purpose	of	life,	one	of	his	sons	had	him	murdered	and
took	his	throne.’
‘You	 speak	 out	 of	 anger	 and	 jealousy.	 You	 resent	 the	 fact	 that	 I	 have	 taken	 your	 thoughts	 on
ceremony	 and,	 with	 the	 stars’	 aid,	 improved	 them	 beyond	 your	 narrow	 comprehension.	 You	 resent
my	not	needing	you	as	I	once	did,	that	I	am	a	grown	man	who	takes	his	own	decisions	and	has	no	need
of	the	advice	of	women	–	not	yours,	nor	Gulrukh’s	nor	any	of	you	.	.	.	You	should	know	your	place	–
all	of	you.’
Khanzada’s	 gasp	 told	 him	 how	 much	 he	 had	 hurt	 her,	 but	 she	 needed	 to	 be	 reminded	 of	 certain
things.	 Much	 as	 he	 loved	 and	 respected	 her,	 he,	 not	 she,	 was	 emperor	 and	 he	 would	 decide	 how	 he
would	rule.
‘I	 have	 done	 my	 best	 to	 warn	 you.	 If	 you	 choose	 not	 to	 listen	 there	 is	 no	 more	 I	 can	 do	 .	 .	 .’
Khanzada’s	voice	was	low	and	measured	but	he	could	see	a	vein	throbbing	in	her	temple	and	that	her
body	was	trembling.
‘Aunt	.	.	.’	He	reached	out	to	touch	her	arm	but	she	turned	away	and	making	for	the	doors	flung
them	open	herself.	Calling	to	her	two	women	who	were	waiting	for	her,	she	hurried	away	down	the
torch-lit	 corridor.	 Humayun	 stood	 for	 a	 moment	 in	 silence.	 He’d	 never	 quarrelled	 with	 Khanzada
before,	but	what	he’d	said	had	been	necessary,	hadn’t	it?	The	stars	and	their	messages	could	not	be
ignored.	A	man	–	even	one	as	powerful	as	an	emperor	–	was	as	nothing	compared	to	the	seemingly
never-ending	 cycles	 of	 movement	 of	 the	 stars	 within	 the	 fathomless	 universe.	 If	 he	 followed	 their
signs	his	reign	would	surely	prosper.
And	what	his	aunt	had	said	about	Gulrukh	.	.	.	that	was	also	wrong.	Of	course,	like	all	those	at	court
she	wanted	the	emperor ’s	good	will.	Maybe	she	hoped	that	by	pleasing	him	she’d	secure	favours	and

privileges	for	her	sons,	his	half-brothers	Kamran	and	Askari	.	.	.	but	that	was	all.	The	mind-expanding
journeys	 on	 which	 Gulrukh’s	 dark,	 opium-laced	 wine	 took	 him	 were	 her	 gift	 to	 him	 and	 he	 would
not,	 could	 not	 give	 them	 up	 .	 .	 .not	 when	 they	 were	 bringing	 him	 ever	 closer	 to	 unravelling	 the
mysteries	of	existence.

‘Let	whoever	is	striking	the	drum	approach.	Today	is	Friday	–	the	day	when	I	am	ready	to	dispense
justice	to	even	the	most	humble	of	my	subjects.’	Humayun	smiled	as	he	sat	on	his	high-backed	throne.
This	 was	 the	 first	 time	 in	 the	 six	 months	 that	 it	 had	 been	 sitting	 outside	 his	 audience	 chamber	 that
anyone	 had	 struck	 the	 great	 ox-hide	 drum	 to	 demand	 justice	 of	 the	 emperor.	 At	 the	 beginning	 the
sound	had	been	faint	and	uneven	and	for	a	moment	had	seemed	to	stop	entirely.	Then	Humayun	had
heard	it	again.	Whoever	was	beating	the	Drum	of	Justice	seemed	to	have	taken	courage.	The	booms
had	grown	louder	and	more	frequent.	He’d	known	this	moment	would	come	just	as	–	in	time	–	his
ministers	would	accept	the	reforms	he	was	making.	Even	old	Kasim,	standing	so	solemn-faced	by	the
side	of	his	throne,	would	acknowledge	he’d	been	right.
The	footsteps	of	six	of	his	blue-turbaned	bodyguards	rang	on	the	stone	floor	as	they	marched	out
to	the	courtyard.	When	they	returned,	a	young	Hindu	woman	in	a	red	silk	sari	with	a	red	tilak	mark	on
her	forehead	was	with	them.	Her	long	dark	hair	was	streaming	unbound	over	her	shoulders	and	her
expression	was	both	nervous	and	determined.	The	guards	brought	her	to	within	ten	feet	of	the	throne
and	she	knelt	before	him.
‘Rise.	The	emperor	is	ready	to	hear	your	request,’	said	Kasim.	‘You	may	be	assured	that	you	will
receive	justice.’
The	woman	glanced	uncertainly	at	the	glittering,	bejewelled	figure	of	Humayun	on	his	throne	as	if
she	 could	 not	 quite	 believe	 she	 was	 in	 his	 presence.	 ‘Majesty,	 my	 name	 is	 Sita.	 I	 am	 the	 wife	 of	 a
merchant	in	Agra.	My	husband	deals	in	spices	like	cinnamon,	saffron	and	cloves.	A	week	ago	he	was
returning	to	Agra	with	a	small	mule	train	carrying	goods	he	had	purchased	in	the	markets	in	Delhi.
Two	days’	ride	from	here	–	near	our	holy	Hindu	city	of	Mathura	–	he	and	his	men	were	attacked	by
dacoits	 who	 robbed	 them	 of	 everything	 they	 were	 carrying	 –	 even	 stripping	 the	 clothes	 off	 their
backs.	The	dacoits	were	about	to	ride	away	with	the	mules	when	a	party	of	your	soldiers	came	riding
by.	The	soldiers	killed	the	dacoits	but	instead	of	restoring	his	goods	to	my	husband	they	jeered	at	him.
They	 said	 that	 he	 was	 bleating	 like	 a	 sheep	 and	 that	 was	 how	 he	 deserved	 to	 be	 treated.	 Cutting	 the
ropes	with	which	the	dacoits	had	bound	him,	they	made	him	run	naked	and	barefoot	over	the	hot	sand,
chasing	him	on	horseback	and	mocking	and	pricking	him	with	the	tips	of	their	spears.	When	finally
they	had	tired	of	their	sport,	they	rode	off	leaving	him	lying	exhausted	and	bleeding	in	the	dust.And
with	them	they	took	all	my	husband’s	mules	with	their	precious	cargo	of	spices	.	.	.’
Sita’s	voice	was	trembling	with	anger	and	indignation	but	she	raised	her	chin	and	looked	Humayun
squarely	 in	 the	 face.	 ‘I	 seek	 justice	 for	 my	 husband.	 He	 is	 a	 loyal	 subject	 of	 Your	 Majesty	 and	 no
longer	young.Your	soldiers	should	have	protected	not	abused	him.	Now	he	is	lying	at	home	covered
in	festering	wounds	inflicted	by	them	.	.	.’
Kasim	stepped	forward,	ready	to	question	the	woman,	but	Humayun	waved	him	back.	The	soldiers’
behaviour	reflected	on	his	dignity.	He	must	be	like	the	sun	to	his	subjects.	His	light	and	warmth	must
fall	on	them	all	but	this	poor	merchant	had	been	cast	into	the	darkness	.	.	.

‘What	more	can	you	tell	me	of	these	soldiers?	Do	you	know	their	names?’
‘My	husband	said	that	one	of	them	called	their	leader	Mirak	Beg	and	that	he	was	a	tall,	broad	man
with	a	broken	nose	and	a	white	scar	disfiguring	his	lip.’
Humayun	 knew	 Mirak	 Beg	 –	 a	 rowdy,	 hard-living	 chieftain	 from	 Badakhshan	 who	 had	 marched
with	 Humayun	 and	 his	 father	 to	 invade	 Hindustan.	 He	 had	 distinguished	 himself	 at	 Panipat,	 leaping
from	his	horse	on	to	the	back	leg	of	a	war	elephant	and	hauling	himself	up	the	beast	to	kill	enemy
archers	who’d	been	firing	arrows	at	Humayun’s	men	from	the	howdah	on	its	back.	But	past	bravery
was	no	excuse	for	present	crimes.	Mirak	Beg	must	answer	for	his	lawlessness.
‘If	what	you	have	told	me	is	the	truth,	I	will	give	you	justice.	Go	home	now	and	await	my	summons.
Kasim	–	find	Mirak	Beg	and	bring	him	before	me	as	soon	as	possible.’
Rising,	 Humayun	 rushed	 from	 the	 audience	 chamber.	 He	 felt	 sick.	 His	 head	 was	 aching	 again	 –
these	sharp	stabbing	pains	behind	his	eyes	were	becoming	more	and	more	frequent	and	so	too	were
the	tricks	his	eyes	were	playing,	making	it	hard	for	him	to	focus.	He	needed	more	wine	and	opium	to
soothe	away	the	pain,	relax	his	mind	again	and	free	him	from	the	mundane	obligations	of	the	court.

Dressed	 in	 blood-red	 robes	 as	 befitted	 Tuesday,	 the	 day	 governed	 by	 the	 planet	 Mars,	 Humayun
looked	down	at	Mirak	Beg’s	defiant	face.	Though	hauled	into	the	audience	chamber	in	chains,	he	was
somehow	 managing	 to	 maintain	 his	 usual	 swaggering	 air.	 His	 dark	 eyes	 were	 fixed	 on	 Humayun’s
face	and	he	seemed	not	to	have	noticed	the	executioners	standing	ready	with	their	freshly	oiled	axes
or	the	dark	red	blood	staining	the	Stone	of	Execution	–	the	giant	slab	of	black	marble	that	had	been
placed	to	the	right	of	the	throne	and	on	which	four	of	Mirak	Beg’s	wildly	struggling	men	had	just	had
their	right	hands	chopped	off	and	the	stumps	cauterised	with	red-hot	irons.	The	smell	of	their	burning
flesh	still	filled	the	air,	even	though	they	had	been	led	out.
‘I	 have	 left	 you	 till	 last,	 Mirak	 Beg,	 so	 that	 you	 could	 witness	 the	 punishment	 meted	 out	 to	 your
soldiers.	Though	they	did	wrong	and	have	paid	the	price,	you,	as	their	leader,	bear	the	responsibility
for	their	shameful	acts.You	have	freely	admitted	your	guilt	but	that	will	not	save	you	.	.	.	Your	acts
have	put	a	stain	on	my	honour	that	only	your	death	will	cleanse.What	is	more,	you	will	not	die	by	the
axe.	The	means	of	your	execution	will	fit	your	crime.	Woman	–	come	closer.’
Humayun	gestured	to	Sita,	the	spice	merchant’s	wife,	who	wrapped	in	a	dark	blue	sari	was	standing
to	one	side.	She	had	not	flinched	from	watching	the	amputations	and	now	she	would	see	true	imperial
justice,	Humayun	thought.	The	punishment	he	was	about	to	pronounce	on	Mirak	Beg	had	come	to	him
in	his	dreams	and	its	appropriateness	pleased	him.	It	would	come	as	a	surprise	to	all	–	he	had	not	even
told	Kasim	or	Baisanghar,	both	standing	by	the	throne	and,	like	the	rest	of	his	courtiers,	dressed	in
red	as	he	had	commanded.
‘On	 your	 knees,	 Mirak	 Beg.’	 The	 chieftain	 looked	 almost	 surprised	 as	 if	 until	 now	 he’d	 not
believed	Humayun	would	kill	him.	The	white	scar	on	his	upper	lip	almost	disappeared	as	the	blood
seemed	 to	 drain	 from	 his	 face,	 which	 now	 had	 a	 waxy	 sheen.	 He	 licked	 his	 lips,	 then,	 finding	 his
courage	again,	spoke	out	firmly	for	all	to	hear.
‘Majesty	.	.	.	I	fought	for	you	at	Panipat	and	later	in	Gujarat	.	.	.	I	have	always	been	loyal	to	you.	All
I	did	was	seek	some	sport	with	a	fat,	cowardly	merchant.	That	does	not	merit	death.	I	and	my	men	are
warriors,	 yet	 since	 Gujarat	 you’ve	 given	 us	 no	 fighting	 .	 .	 .	 no	 conquests	 .	 .	 .	 you	 spend	 your	 time

eating	opium	and	gazing	at	the	stars	when	you	should	be	leading	your	armies.	That’s	what	we	came
from	our	homeland	for	.	.	.	that’s	what	you	promised	us	.	.	.	the	sound	of	our	horses’	hooves	pounding
on	the	earth	as	we	rode	from	victory	to	victory	.	.	.’
‘Enough!’	Raising	his	hand,	Humayun	signalled	to	the	two	executioners.	They	put	down	their	axes
and	 one	 of	 them	 picked	 up	 a	 small	 sack	 that	 had	 been	 placed	 against	 a	 nearby	 pillar.	 Then,	 as
Humayun’s	 guards	 held	 Mirak	 Beg	 by	 the	 shoulders,	 one	 of	 the	 executioners	 went	 behind	 him,
wrenched	 back	 his	 head	 and	 forced	 his	 mouth	 open.	 The	 other	 man	 dug	 his	 hand	 into	 the	 sack.
Humayun	could	smell	the	sharp	tang	of	the	coarse-ground	turmeric	and	pepper	as	he	took	a	fistful	of
the	bright	yellow	powder	and	crammed	it	into	Mirak	Beg’s	gaping	mouth.
Mirak	Beg	at	once	began	to	choke.	His	streaming	eyes	bulged	from	his	head	as	a	second,	then	a
third	fistful	was	rammed	through	his	open	jaws	down	into	his	throat.	His	face	was	purpling	now	and
strings	 of	 yellow	 saliva	 were	 dribbling	 from	 his	 tortured	 mouth	 while	 mucus	 streamed	 from	 his
nostrils.	Desperately	he	fought	to	get	free	of	the	strong	arms	holding	him	down	and	to	struggle	to	his
feet,	kicking	out	with	his	legs	like	a	man	being	hanged.
From	all	around	Humayun	heard	gasps.	Kasim	had	turned	away	and	Baisanghar	too	was	averting
his	 gaze.	 Even	 Sita	 was	 looking	 shocked,	 one	 tightly	 curled	 hand	 raised	 to	 her	 mouth	 and	 her	 eyes
round.	A	few	more	seconds	and	it	would	be	over.	For	one	last	time,	Mirak	Beg	forced	his	streaming
eyes	to	open	and	for	a	moment	they	looked	directly	into	Humayun’s,	and	then	his	body	went	still.
Humayun	 rose.	 ‘The	 punishment	 has	 fitted	 the	 crime.	 And	 so	 will	 all	 who	 transgress	 my	 laws
suffer.’	Stepping	down	from	the	dais	on	which	his	golden	throne,	his	gaddi	–	draped	in	red	velvet	to
mark	the	day	of	Mars	–	stood	and	flanked	by	his	guards,	Humayun	made	his	way	out	of	the	room.	For
a	few	seconds	there	was	silence,	then	behind	him	he	heard	a	babble	of	voices	as	his	courtiers	once
more	found	their	tongues.
It	was	early	evening	now.	Above	the	darkening	Jumna,	a	sliver	of	moon	was	already	rising,	casting
its	 silver	 light	 upon	 the	 riverbank	 where	 oxen	 and	 camels	 were	 drinking	 their	 fill.	 He	 would	 visit
Salima.	He	had	done	so	less	often	recently,	absorbed	in	his	opium	dreams.	At	the	thought	of	her	soft,
golden-hued	body,	he	smiled.
Salima	 was	 lying	 on	 a	 silver	 brocade	 divan	 while	 one	 of	 her	 waiting	 women	 traced	 intricate
designs	 on	 her	 slim	 feet	 with	 henna	 paste.	 All	 she	 was	 wearing	 was	 the	 jewelled	 belt	 Humayun	 had
chosen	for	her	from	the	plunder	he	had	captured	in	Gujarat.
That	campaign	seemed	so	long	ago	now	–	like	something	from	another	life.	Into	his	mind	came
Mirak	Beg’s	accusing	words	‘You’ve	given	us	no	conquests	.	.	.	You	spend	your	time	eating	opium
and	gazing	at	the	stars.’	Mirak	Beg	had	deserved	to	die,	but	perhaps	there	had	been	some	truth	in	his
accusations.	What	would	his	father	have	said	about	the	way	he	was	governing,	even	about	the	amount
of	opium	he	was	consuming?	Perhaps,	as	Kasim	and	Khanzada	had	urged,	he	should	use	less	of	the
drug	 to	 enable	 him	 to	 devote	 more	 time	 to	 those	 around	 him.	 But	 things	 had	 changed,	 hadn’t	 they?
The	 Moghuls’	 wild,	 nomadic	 days	 were	 over.	 He	 was	 the	 ruler	 of	 an	 empire	 and	 it	 was	 no	 one’s
business	but	his	own	that	he	was	finding	new	ways	of	ruling,	new	sources	of	comfort	and	inspiration.
The	stars	whose	radiance	was	brighter	even	than	the	Koh-i-Nur	would	not	let	him	down.
Nor	 would	 Salima.	 As	 her	 women	 hurried	 from	 the	 room,	 she	 rose	 from	 her	 couch.	 Slowly,
caressingly	she	began	to	loosen	his	red	robes,	running	her	fingers	over	the	hard	muscle	of	his	arms
and	 shoulders	 beneath	 the	 soft	 silk.	 ‘My	 emperor,’	 she	 was	 whispering.	 He	 wound	 his	 hands	 in	 the
long	 black	 hair	 spilling	 over	 her	 bare	 breasts	 and	 pulled	 her	 to	 him,	 hungry	 for	 the	 pleasures	 they
would	enjoy	until	–	at	last	–	with	salty	sweat	running	down	their	bodies	they	would	collapse	exhausted
against	one	another.

A	 few	 hours	 later,	 Humayun	 was	 lying	 by	 Salima’s	 side.	 A	 soft	 breeze	 was	 blowing	 through	 the
open	casement	and	a	pale	light	was	already	rising	in	the	eastern	sky.	Salima	murmured	something	and
then,	 turning	 her	 silken	 hip	 to	 his,	 returned	 to	 her	 dreams.	 But	 for	 some	 reason,	 sleep	 had	 eluded
Humayun.	Each	time	he’d	closed	his	eyes,	he	saw	Mirak	Beg’s	distorted,	choking	mouth	foaming	with
yellow	spittle	and	his	panic-stricken	eyes	half	bursting	from	his	head.	He	should	have	taken	some	of
Gulrukh’s	wine	to	banish	these	disturbing	images	but	that	was	in	his	own	apartment.	Nevertheless,	he
could	still	ease	his	restless	mind.	Reaching	for	the	gold	locket	studded	with	amethysts	hanging	from	a
chain	 around	 his	 neck,	 he	 extracted	 some	 opium	 pellets	 and,	 pouring	 water	 into	 a	 cup,	 swallowed
them	down.	The	familiar	bitter	taste	caught	at	the	back	of	his	throat	but	then	the	drowsy,	languorous
warmth	began	to	steal	through	him.	With	his	eyelids	at	last	growing	heavy,	Humayun	stretched	out.
The	soothing	sweetness	of	the	sandalwood	oil	with	which	Salima	loved	to	anoint	her	body	filled	his
nostrils	and	he	began	to	drift	into	sleep.	But	only	moments	later	–	or	so	it	felt	to	Humayun	–	he	heard
a	female	voice	urgently	calling	his	name.
‘Majesty	.	.	.	Majesty	.	.	.	a	messenger	has	come.’
Dazed,	Humayun	sat	up.	Where	was	he?	Looking	around	he	saw	Salima,	sitting	up	now	beside	him
and	pulling	on	a	pink	silk	robe	to	conceal	her	nakedness.	But	it	wasn’t	her	who’d	woken	him.	It	was
one	of	the	haram	attendants,	Barlas	–	a	squat	woman	with	a	face	wrinkled	as	a	walnut.
‘Forgive	me,	Majesty.’	Barlas	was	averting	her	gaze	from	his	naked	body.	‘A	messenger	has	come
from	 the	 east,	 from	 your	 brother	 Askari,	 with	 news	 he	 says	 is	 urgent.	 Even	 though	 it	 is	 early,	 he
requests	an	immediate	audience	and	Kasim	ordered	me	to	wake	and	tell	you.’
Humayun’s	unfocused	eyes	stared	at	Barlas	as	he	tried	to	take	in	what	she	was	saying,	but	the	opium
had	made	him	slow.	‘Very	well.	I	will	return	to	my	apartments.	Tell	Kasim	to	bring	this	messenger	to
me	there.’
Half	an	hour	later,	back	in	his	own	quarters,	dressed	in	a	simple	purple	tunic	and	having	splashed
his	face	with	cold	water,	Humayun	looked	at	the	man	whose	arrival	had	caused	him	to	be	roused	from
his	 rest.	 The	 messenger	 was	 a	 tall,	 slight	 man	 still	 with	 the	 dust	 of	 the	 road	 on	 his	 sweat-stained
clothes.	 In	 his	 eagerness	 to	 speak	 to	 Humayun	 he	 almost	 forgot	 the	 ritual	 obeisance	 until	 reminded
sharply	by	Kasim.	As	soon	as	he	was	back	on	his	feet,	he	began.	‘Majesty,	I	am	Kamal.	I	serve	your
brother	 Askari	 in	 Jaunpur.	 Reports	 reached	 us	 there	 of	 a	 great	 rebellion	 led	 by	 Sher	 Shah.Your
brother	waited	until	he	was	certain	they	were	true	then	sent	me	to	warn	you.’
Humayun	 stared.	 Though	 Sher	 Shah	 controlled	 large	 lands	 in	 Bengal,	 this	 grandson	 of	 a	 horse
trader	would	surely	never	dare	to	threaten	him.	He	had	pledged	himself	to	Babur	as	a	vassal	of	the
Moghuls.	 Yet	 ambition	 often	 pushed	 men	 to	 rash	 acts.	 It	 might	 be	 ominous	 that	 he	 had	 assumed	 the
name	‘Sher ’,	which	meant	‘tiger ’.	Perhaps	by	doing	so	he	intended	to	throw	down	a	direct	challenge
to	the	true	dynasty	of	the	tiger	–	the	Moghuls.	Humayun	glanced	down	at	Timur ’s	ring,	but	with	eyes
still	 dilated	 by	 opium	 he	 could	 not	 focus	 on	 the	 snarling	 image	 of	 the	 tiger	 etched	 into	 its	 surface.
After	a	moment	Humayun	returned	his	attention	to	the	messenger.	‘Tell	me	more.’
‘Sher	Shah	is	claiming	large	Moghul	territories	for	himself.	He	has	also	declared	himself	leader	of
all	Hindustani	resistance	to	the	Moghuls	and	has	vowed	to	free	Hindustan	of	every	prince	of	the	house
of	 Timur.	 Even	 the	 proudest	 chieftains	 have	 become	 his	 retainers.	 Here	 –	 I	 bring	 you	 a	 letter	 from
your	brother	which	tells	you	everything	that	has	happened	–	how	far	Sher	Shah	has	advanced,	how
many	chieftains	have	declared	their	support	for	him	.	.	.’	The	man	held	out	a	camel-skin	pouch.
‘Give	it	to	my	vizier.	I	will	read	it	later,	when	I	have	rested.’
The	man	looked	startled	but	at	once	handed	the	pouch	to	Kasim.
‘Kasim	–	see	that	this	man	is	given	food	and	water	and	lodgings	in	the	fort.’	But	Kasim	too	seemed

to	be	looking	at	him	strangely.	He	didn’t	understand	that	there	was	no	point	in	rushing	to	take	action.
Later	–	when	his	mind	had	cleared	–	Humayun	would	think	what	to	do.	‘Go	now.	Leave	me	in	peace.’
As	the	doors	closed	behind	Kasim	and	the	messenger,	Humayun	glanced	out	through	the	casement.
The	 perfect	 orange	 disc	 of	 the	 sun	 was	 rising	 into	 a	 cloudless	 sky.	 The	 red	 sandstone	 of	 the	 fort
glowed	 as	 if	 it	 were	 about	 to	 burst	 into	 flame.	 Humayun	 rubbed	 his	 eyes	 and	 signalled	 to	 his
attendants	 to	 lower	 the	 woven	 grass	 tatti	 screens	 to	 block	 out	 the	 relentless	 brightness	 that	 was
making	his	head	throb.	The	news	of	Sher	Shah	was	bad	and	he	must	respond,	but	first	he	must	sleep
and	 to	 do	 that	 needed	 something	 to	 soothe	 his	 mind.	 He	 went	 over	 to	 a	 carved	 rosewood	 cabinet,
unlocked	it	and	took	out	a	bottle	of	Gulrukh’s	wine.	This	would	help,	wouldn’t	it?	He	pulled	out	the
stopper	but	then	remembered	that	he	would	need	a	clear	head	later	in	the	morning	to	decide	what	to
do	about	Sher	Shah.	But	perhaps	it	wouldn’t	really	matter	if	the	decision	waited	until	the	afternoon.	He
poured	some	of	Gulrukh’s	mixture	into	an	agate	cup.	A	few	minutes	later	he	was	drifting	softly	away
but	almost	at	once	some	sort	of	commotion	again	intruded	into	his	dreams.
‘Raise	the	tattis	 and	 leave	 me	 alone	 with	 the	 emperor,’	 came	 an	 angry	 female	 voice.	 ‘Humayun.’
Now	it	was	shouting	his	name	and	seemed	to	be	drawing	closer.	‘Humayun!’	He	sat	up	with	a	gasp	as
a	 deluging	 mass	 of	 cold	 water	 brought	 him	 back	 to	 consciousness.	 Forcing	 his	 eyes	 open	 he	 saw
Khanzada	standing	by	the	side	of	his	bed,	an	empty	brass	ewer	in	her	hand	and	eyes	full	of	anger.
‘What	d’you	want?’	Humayun	gazed	at	her	stupidly,	uncertain	whether	she	was	real	or	some	sort	of
hallucination.
‘Get	up.You	are	a	warrior	–	an	emperor	–	but	I	find	you	lounging	here	in	the	dark	in	a	drugged
stupor	 like	 a	 haram	 eunuch	 at	 a	 time	 when	 your	 empire	 is	 in	 danger	 .	 .	 .	 I	 have	 just	 learned	 of	 the
arrival	of	Askari’s	messenger	and	of	the	news	he	brought.	Why	haven’t	you	summoned	your	council
immediately?’
‘I	will	when	I	am	ready	.	.	.’
‘Look	at	you!’	Khanzada	seized	a	mirror	set	with	rubies	and	thrust	it	before	him.	Reflected	in	the
burnished	 surface	 he	 saw	 a	 pallid	 face	 and	 dark,	 distant	 eyes	 with	 dilated	 pupils	 and	 deep,	 almost
purple	bags	beneath	them.	He	continued	to	stare,	fascinated	by	the	features	that	seemed	so	familiar,	but
Khanzada	ripped	the	mirror	from	his	hand	and	flung	it	against	the	wall,	causing	the	metal	to	buckle
and	several	of	the	rubies	to	fall	from	their	mounts.	They	lay	on	the	floor	like	drops	of	blood.
Kneeling	before	him,	Khanzada	took	Humayun	by	the	shoulders.	‘Opium	is	destroying	your	mind	.
.	.	You	do	not	even	recognise	yourself	in	the	mirror,	do	you?	Do	I	have	to	remind	you	who	you	are	.	.
.	do	I	have	to	tell	you	of	your	bravery	and	the	battles	you	won	on	your	father ’s	behalf	and	of	your
destiny	 and	 duty	 to	 the	 Moghul	 dynasty?	 Have	 you	 forgotten	 everything	 that	 made	 you	 –	 us	 –	 the
descendants	of	Timur	–	who	we	are?	I’ve	tried	to	warn	you	before	that	you	are	losing	your	grip	on
reality	 but	 you	 would	 not	 listen.	 Now	 I	 must	 force	 you	 to.	 The	 same	 blood	 that	 runs	 through	 your
veins	flows	through	mine	also.	I	fear	nothing	except	the	loss	of	everything	your	father	–	my	brother	–
fought	and	suffered	for.’
What	was	she	saying?	Suddenly	she	let	go	of	him	and,	leaning	back,	hit	his	face	with	the	full	force
of	her	right	hand.	Again	and	again	she	struck	–	first	the	right	and	then	the	left	side	of	his	face.	Tears
were	streaming	down	her	cheeks.
‘Be	 as	 you	 once	 were.	 Be	 the	 man	 your	 father	 made	 his	 heir,’	 she	 was	 shouting.	 ‘Abandon	 this
cocoon	of	ritual	and	opium	that	is	alienating	your	nobles	and	compromising	your	ability	to	rule.You
are	a	warrior	like	your	father.	Stop	worrying	about	what	the	stars	say	and	whether	you	can	live	up	to
Babur,	just	do	it!’
She	had	stopped	striking	him	but	the	stinging	pain	was	clearing	the	fog	in	his	mind.	The	words	that

–	when	she	had	first	begun	speaking	–	had	seemed	to	have	no	meaning	were	beginning	to	make	some
sense.	Round	and	round	in	his	mind	they	went	and	with	them	images	of	the	past	that	they	conjured	 –
the	 visceral	 excitement	 he	 had	 always	 felt	 in	 the	 heat	 of	 battle	 or	 wrestling	 with	 his	 nobles	 or
galloping	 out	 to	 the	 hunt	 with	 Babur.	 That	 whole,	 vibrant,	 physical	 world	 to	 which	 he	 had	 once
belonged	.	.	.
‘Give	up	the	opium,	Humayun	.	.	.	it	is	destroying	you.	Where	are	you	keeping	it?’
Kasim’s	gentle	words	of	warning	began	to	come	back	to	him	from	many	months	ago	when	Kasim
and	Baisanghar	had	given	advice	in	his	stead	to	the	envoy	of	his	governor	in	Bengal.	If	he	had	talked
to	 the	 man	 himself	 might	 he	 have	 caught	 some	 nuance	 or	 given	 some	 guidance	 that	 might	 have
prevented	Sher	Shah’s	rebellion?	Or	perhaps	Sher	Shah	had	somehow	come	to	learn	of	his	lack	of
interest	 in	 what	 happened	 in	 Bengal.	 Humayun’s	 hand	 went	 slowly	 to	 the	 locket	 around	 his	 neck.
Unclasping	it,	he	handed	it	to	Khanzada.	Then,	equally	slowly,	he	walked	over	to	the	still	open	cabinet
where	 he	 kept	 Gulrukh’s	 opium-infused	 wine.	 As	 he	 reached	 inside	 for	 the	 bottle,	 the	 dark,	 almost
purple	liquid	inside	glinted.	It	had	brought	him	so	much	pleasure,	so	much	knowledge	.	.	.	revealed	so
much	to	marvel	at.	Could	it	really	be	the	destructive	force	that	Kasim	and	Khanzada	claimed?
‘My	father	took	opium	.	.	.’	he	said	slowly,	turning	the	flask.
‘Yes,	but	not	like	you	.	.	.	Babur	never	let	it	control	him	or	dictate	his	actions.	He	never	neglected
his	 trusted	 band	 of	 comrades,	 his	 commanders	 and	 his	 courtiers	 in	 its	 favour.	 But	 in	 you	 it	 has
enslaved	an	emperor.	You	have	become	addicted	.	.	.	just	like	the	man	who	cannot	taste	a	cup	of	wine
without	wanting	to	empty	the	entire	wineskin.	You	must	give	it	up,	Humayun,	or	it	will	destroy	you.
You	will	lose	the	empire	your	father	gained.	Renounce	opium	now	before	it	is	too	late.’
Still	he	gazed	at	the	liquid	in	the	bottle	with	all	its	hidden	secrets	and	delights.	But	then	he	looked	up
at	Khanzada’s	face,	still	wet	with	tears,	and	saw	how	strained	she	looked	and	how	afraid.	And	he	knew
that	that	fear	was	for	him	and	for	the	dynasty	of	which	she	was	a	part	and	for	which	she	had	suffered.
Slowly	the	realisation	that	she	was	right,	that	Kasim	was	right,	that	all	the	others	who	had	expressed
concern	 were	 right,	 penetrated	 the	 opium	 fumes	 in	 his	 mind.	 He	 must	 be	 strong	 –	 strong	 within
himself.	 He	 had	 no	 need	 of	 outside	 props.	 Suddenly	 more	 than	 anything	 he	 wanted	 to	 regain
Khanzada’s	respect,	her	approval.	The	thought	of	how	he	had	treated	her	and	his	closest	advisers	in
recent	months	made	him	ashamed.
‘Give	me	the	bottle,	Humayun.’
‘No,	Aunt.’	Going	to	the	casement,	he	poured	the	liquid	away	to	splash	on	the	ground	below;	then,
flinging	the	bottle	after	it,	he	heard	the	faint,	fragile	tinkle	as	it	shattered.	‘I	will	tell	Gulrukh	that	I	will
accept	no	more	of	her	drugged	wine.	I	swear	to	you,	on	this	ring	of	Timur,	that	however	hard	it	may
be	I	will	take	no	more	opium	or	wine.	I	will	send	her	to	live	with	one	of	her	sons.	And	I	will	prove
anew	to	myself	and	to	you	that	I	am	worthy	of	my	father ’s	trust.’
Khanzada	took	his	face	between	her	hands	and	kissed	him.	‘I	will	help	you	conquer	this	addiction.
Opium	has	such	a	grip	that	it	will	not	be	easy.	You	are	a	great	man,	Humayun,	a	great	leader	–	I	have
always	known	that	–	and	you	will	become	a	greater	one.’
‘And	I	have	always	known	that	you	are	my	most	trusted	confidante.’
‘And	now?’
‘Stay	with	me	while	I	send	for	the	messenger	and	question	him	again.	I	want	you	to	hear	what	he
says.	If	it	is	true,	I	must	prepare	immediately	for	war.’
Later	that	day,	Humayun	sat	on	his	throne.	Before	him	were	his	courtiers	and	commanders.	As	he
had	ordered	they	were	no	longer	dressed	in	clothing	matching	the	planet	governing	the	day	–	neither
was	he.	Khanzada	was	right.	The	rituals	he	had	imposed	had	brought	neither	harmony	nor	strength	to

his	court.	He	must	win	the	respect	and	allegiance	of	his	nobles	in	other	ways.	And	one	of	those	would
be	by	victory	in	the	field.
‘You	 have	 all	 heard	 the	 news	 brought	 by	 the	 messenger	 Kamal.	 Sher	 Shah’s	 invasion	 of	 Moghul
territories	is	an	affront	to	our	honour	that	I	will	not	tolerate.	As	soon	as	the	army	is	ready,	we	will
ride	against	this	upstart.	And	when	I	have	finished	with	Sher	Shah	I	will	trade	him	into	slavery,	just	as
Sher	Shah’s	ancestors	used	to	trade	a	worn-out	horse	to	the	knacker ’s	men.’
As	 Humayun	 finished	 speaking,	 a	 great	 roar	 went	 up	 around	 the	 audience	 chamber	 that	 in	 recent
months	had	fallen	so	silent.	Humayun’s	commanders	were	clashing	their	swords	on	their	shields	in
the	age-old	tradition	of	their	people	and	their	deep	voices	were	taking	up	the	chant,	‘Mirza	Humayun,
Mirza	Humayun’,	that	proclaimed	him	of	Timur ’s	blood.	Humayun	glanced	up	at	the	grille	in	the	wall
to	 one	 side	 of	 his	 throne	 behind	 which	 he	 knew	 Khanzada	 would	 be	 watching	 and	 listening,	 and
smiled.	All	would	be	well.	The	Moghul	emperor	was	leading	his	armies	to	war	once	more.	However
lacking	in	the	arts	of	peace	he	might	have	proved,	he	had	demonstrated	his	skills	as	a	general,	hadn’t
he?

Part	II
In	the	Eye	of	the	Tiger

Chapter	6
The	Water-Carrier
An	hour	after	dawn,	Humayun	made	his	way	from	his	private	chambers	out	through	the	courtyards	of
the	 red	 sandstone	 Agra	 fort	 with	 their	 marble	 pools	 and	 splashing	 fountains,	 through	 the	 high
gateway	and	on	to	the	parade	ground	where	his	army	was	drawn	up.	He	was	dressed	for	war	with	an
etched	 silver	 breastplate	 set	 with	 rubies	 on	 his	 chest	 over	 a	 coat	 of	 silver	 chain	 mail.	 His	 father
Babur ’s	eagle-hilted	sword,	Alamgir,	was	in	its	sapphire-encrusted	scabbard	at	his	side.	On	his	head
was	a	domed	helmet,	again	decorated	with	rubies	and	with	a	tall	peacock	feather	set	in	gold	waving
from	its	peak.
As	 he	 emerged	 from	 the	 iron-studded	 gate	 and	 progressed	 towards	 the	 stand	 at	 the	 centre	 of	 the
parade	 ground	 where	 his	 imperial	 elephant	 –	 the	 usual	 conveyance	 for	 emperors	 and	 generals	 on
ceremonial	journeys	–	was	waiting,	he	saw	that	the	vanguard	of	his	troops	had	already	raised	so	much
pink-grey	dust	as	they	marched	out	that	the	sun	was	only	a	pale,	beige	disc,	all	the	intensity	of	its	glare
lost.	 The	 large	 grey	 elephant	 was	 on	 its	 knees	 with	 its	 great	 gilded	 redcanopied	 howdah	 securely
positioned	on	its	back	and	its	two	drivers	or	mahouts	standing	by	its	head.	His	senior	officers	were
grouped	in	order	of	rank	on	either	side	of	the	elephant.	After	accepting	low	bows	of	greetings	from
each	of	his	commanders	Humayun	paused	to	address	them.
‘Bear	this	message	to	your	men	from	me.	Our	cause	is	just.	We	go	to	recover	what	is	ours	from
this	ill-bred,	upstart	usurper.	How	can	anyone	who	has	seen	our	army	doubt	that	it	is	the	greatest	in
history	 and	 invincible?	 Bid	 the	 men	 be	 of	 good	 cheer.	 Victory	 and	 its	 comrades,	 fame	 and	 reward,
will	accompany	us.’
The	 officers	 bowed	 once	 more	 and	 placing	 one	 foot	 on	 the	 crouching	 elephant’s	 knee	 Humayun
climbed	into	the	howdah	and	sat	on	a	small	gilded	throne.	He	was	followed	immediately	by	two	of	his
bodyguards	and	by	Jauhar.	At	a	sign	from	Humayun	to	the	mahouts	they	too	mounted	and,	positioning
themselves	one	behind	the	other	on	the	elephant’s	neck,	whispered	instructions	into	its	large	ears.	The
obedient	great	beast	rose	slowly	and	gently	to	its	feet	and	Humayun	gave	orders	for	the	trumpets	to
sound	the	signal	for	his	elephant	and	those	bearing	his	generals	to	move	off.	As	they	advanced	to	take
their	place	in	the	column	they	passed	the	artillery	–	large	cannon	with	bronze	barrels	nearly	twenty
feet	long	mounted	on	four	wheels,	some	pulled	by	teams	of	up	to	fifty	oxen,	others	by	six	or	eight
elephants.	Smaller	cannon	were	on	carts	also	drawn	by	oxen.
Next	Humayun	moved	along	the	serried	ranks	of	his	cavalry	–	first	the	mounted	warriors	from	his
father ’s	homelands,	Tajiks,	Badakhshanis,	men	from	the	Kyrgyz	mountains	and	Ferghana	Valley,	as
well	as	those	of	Afghanistan.	Theirs	were	the	strongest	horses,	still	bred	from	those	they	had	brought
from	the	steppes.	Theirs	too,	he	believed,	was	the	strongest	loyalty	to	the	Moghul	dynasty.	After	them
he	saw	the	orange	garb	of	some	of	his	Rajput	vassals.	Eager	as	all	Rajputs	were	said	to	be	for	battle,
these	imposing,	black-bearded	men	beat	their	swords	on	their	small,	round,	studded	shields	in	martial
greeting	as	Humayun	passed.
As	he	saluted	each	contingent	in	turn,	Humayun	reflected	that	victory	would	indeed	surely	be	his.

He	 had	 a	 quarter	 of	 a	 million	 soldiers	 –	 far	 more	 than	 Sher	 Shah.	 He	 had	 at	 least	 ten	 times	 more
cannon	 and	 –	 as	 he	 had	 proved	 during	 his	 campaign	 in	 Gujarat	 –	 he	 himself	 was	 an	 able	 general
blessed	by	fortune.	Therefore	he	had	granted	the	request	from	his	aunt	Khanzada	to	accompany	the
army	 on	 the	 march	 and	 to	 bring	 with	 her	 his	 bright-eyed,	 quick-witted	 half-sister	 Gulbadan.	 Amid
such	 a	 protecting	 host	 they	 would	 face	 no	 more	 danger	 than	 at	 Agra,	 which	 he	 was	 leaving	 in	 the
loyal	 and	 capable	 hands	 of	 Kasim	 and	 his	 grandfather	 Baisanghar.	 He	 would	 be	 glad	 of	 his	 aunt’s
experienced	advice	but	also	of	her	support	should	he	ever	feel	the	temptation	to	lose	himself	in	opium
once	more.	She	would	not	permit	it.
He	had	also	allowed	himself	the	luxury	of	taking	with	him	Salima	and	three	of	his	other	favourite
concubines.	His	renunciation	of	wine	and	opium	had	only	served	to	increase	his	appetite	for	the	soft,
sensual	 pleasures	 of	 the	 haram.	 The	 three	 young	 women	 he	 had	 chosen	 –	 Melita	 of	 the	 flexible,
wanton	 body	 from	 Gujarat,	 the	 voluptuous	 full-lipped,	 full-breasted	 Mehrunissa	 from	 Lahore	 and
witty,	puckish	and	inventive	Meera	from	Agra	itself	–	were	each,	like	Salima	with	her	supple	body,
soft	mouth	and	agile	tongue,	in	their	different	ways	experts	in	the	arts	of	love.	What	relaxation	amid
the	stress	of	preparation	for	battle	they	would	bring	him,	what	pleasures	in	his	victory.	The	women
would	 ride	 in	 curtained	 howdahs	 on	 sedate	 elephants	 and	 be	 guarded	 by	 the	 most	 trusted	 of	 his
bodyguards.

Just	 after	 the	 time	 of	 the	 midday	 meal	 six	 weeks	 later,	 Humayun’s	 chief	 scout	 Ahmed	 Khan
approached	his	scarlet	command	tent,	erected	as	usual	in	the	very	centre	of	the	camp.	Here	Humayun
was	relaxing	on	a	gold	brocade	mattress	topped	with	maroon	cushions,	a	cooling	sherbet	in	his	hands
as	he	listened	to	the	soft	cadences	of	Jauhar ’s	flute.	As	Ahmed	Khan	entered,	Humayun	signalled	to
Jauhar	to	cease	playing.
‘What	is	it,	Ahmed	Khan?’
‘Majesty,	despite	exploring	for	fifty	miles	around	our	camp	we	were	unable	to	detect	any	sign	of
Sher	Shah’s	armies.	However,	we	came	upon	a	small	landowner	in	his	mud	fortress	about	forty-five
or	so	miles	to	the	southeast	of	here.	He	claimed	to	be	a	vassal	of	Sher	Shah	but	one	who	feared	that
his	 master	 had	 overreached	 himself	 in	 rebelling	 against	 you.	 He	 had	 not	 therefore	 hurried	 to	 join
Sher	Shah’s	army.	He	told	us	that	to	his	knowledge	Sher	Shah	was	at	least	another	fifty	miles	away
beyond	 the	 point	 at	 Allahbad	 where	 the	 Jumna	 and	 the	 Ganges	 meet.	 He	 said	 he	 would	 be	 happy	 to
accompany	us	here	to	tell	you	what	he	knew.	We	took	him	at	his	word	and	brought	him,	blindfolded
of	course	to	prevent	his	seeing	anything	of	the	direction	of	our	camp	or	the	strength	of	our	army.	We
arrived	just	an	hour	ago	and	I	have	arranged	that	he	should	be	given	food	while	I	discovered	whether
you	wished	to	speak	to	him.’
‘You’ve	done	well.	Bring	him	to	me	in	half	an	hour.’
Exactly	thirty	minutes	later,	Ahmed	Khan	–	well	aware	of	Humayun’s	penchant	for	precision	–	was
back.	Behind	him,	between	two	well-armed	guards,	was	a	short,	slightly	stout,	dark-skinned	man	of
about	forty,	dressed	all	in	dark	green	with	a	turban	of	the	same	colour.	Unprompted,	he	bowed	low
before	Humayun.
‘Who	are	you?’

‘Tariq	Khan,	takhaldar	of	Ferozepur.’
‘And	you’re	a	vassal	of	Sher	Shah?’
‘Yes	 –	 and	 he	 has	 always	 been	 a	 good	 master	 to	 me	 .	 .	 .	 but	 above	 all	 I	 am	 a	 loyal	 subject	 of
yourself,	my	ultimate	overlord,	Majesty.	Sher	Shah	has	been	foolish	to	rebel.’
‘Insolent	and	disrespectful,	insulting	the	rightful	order,	you	mean	to	say	.	.	.	But	what	do	you	know
of	his	whereabouts	and	intentions?’
‘His	 armies	 did	 not	 pass	 directly	 through	 my	 own	 territories	 but	 they	 did	 traverse	 those	 of	 my
cousin	twenty	miles	to	the	north	of	mine.	He	said	Sher	Shah’s	army	was	small	–	no	more	than	eighty
thousand	men.	My	cousin	paid	his	respects	to	him	in	his	camp.	He	told	me	Sher	Shah	seemed	shocked
that	he	had	provoked	you	to	action	with	such	a	vast	army.	He	told	my	cousin	he	would	not	fight	if	he
could	negotiate	a	peace	with	you	under	which	he	retained	his	lands	as	your	vassal	once	more.’
‘Did	your	cousin	learn	anything	of	his	future	movements?’
‘One	of	Sher	Shah’s	scouts	indiscreetly	told	my	cousin’s	vizier	that	they	were	heading	for	the	lowlying	 jungles	 and	 marshes	 of	 Bengal	 where	 –	 if	 they	 had	 to	 fight	 –	 they	 might	 be	 better	 able	 to
withstand	your	might.’
‘Before	I	discuss	what	you	have	said	with	my	council,	have	you	anything	else	to	add?’
‘Only	 that	 should	 Your	 Majesty	 wish	 to	 test	 Sher	 Shah’s	 resolution	 by	 offers	 of	 peace,	 I	 am
prepared	to	accompany	any	emissary	you	send	and	undertake	to	bring	him	safely	to	Sher	Shah’s	camp
and	into	his	presence.’
‘I	 will	 consider	 this.	 Now,	 Ahmed	 Khan,	 blindfold	 him	 once	 more	 and	 keep	 him	 in	 close	 but
comfortable	confinement	in	your	headquarters.	Jauhar,	summon	my	council	to	meet	me	here	an	hour
before	 sunset.	 In	 the	 meantime	 ask	 Salima	 to	 join	 me.’	 In	 the	 heat	 his	 lust	 rose	 quickly,	 Humayun
thought,	 and	 twice	 as	 often	 as	 in	 the	 cool.	 She	 would	 know	 how	 to	 slake	 it	 and	 clear	 his	 mind	 to
concentrate	on	the	discussions	ahead.
Salima,	as	always,	did	her	work	well.	When	his	council	assembled,	Humayun	felt	relaxed,	almost
ready	to	purr	like	some	great	tiger,	as	he	addressed	his	advisers.	‘You	have	heard	about	Tariq	Khan
and	his	reports	that	Sher	Shah	is	headed	deep	into	the	jungles	of	Bengal	to	avoid	confronting	us	and
that	 –	 regretting	 his	 presumption	 –	 he	 may	 be	 amenable	 to	 negotiations	 for	 peace.	 What	 do	 you
think?’
‘There’s	 no	 question	 we	 have	 the	 stronger	 army.	 Let	 us	 simply	 find	 and	 destroy	 him,’	 said	 Baba
Yasaval,	 his	 lock	 of	 grey	 hair	 swinging	 from	 his	 shaved	 head	 as	 he	 looked	 around	 at	 his	 fellow
commanders.
‘But	wait,’	said	Humayun’s	cousin	Suleiman	Mirza.	‘If	we	have	the	stronger	army	and	we	trust	in
our	men’s	loyalty,	what	do	we	lose	by	delaying	long	enough	to	send	an	ambassador?	They’ll	be	back
in	plenty	of	time	for	us	–	if	needed	–	to	advance	again	before	the	monsoon	arrives	in	two	months.’
‘It’s	still	better	to	crush	him	now.’	BabaYasaval	was	adamant.	‘Making	an	example	of	him	will	deter
other	rebels.’
‘But	we	will	lose	troops	and	time	we	could	spend	in	other	campaigns	to	enlarge	our	empire.	I’ve
always	 hankered	 to	 ride	 south	 across	 the	 Deccan	 Plateau	 to	 the	 diamond	 mines	 of	 Golconda,’	 said
Suleiman	Mirza.
‘I	agree,’	said	Yunus	Pathan,	one	of	Humayun’s	best	generals,	quietly.	‘Sher	Shah	is	said	to	be	an
able	administrator	and	Bengal	is	a	rich,	fertile	province.	If	we	kill	him	and	his	chief	courtiers,	we	will
need	to	spend	time	setting	up	new	structures	and	appointing	new	officials.	If	we	reach	an	agreement
with	him	from	our	position	of	strength	we	can	use	him	and	his	administration	to	raise	taxes	quickly	to
pay	for	our	armies	and	reward	our	troops,	and	move	on	to	Golconda.’

Humayun	 pondered.Yunus	 Pathan’s	 words	 were	 persuasive.	 Besides,	 being	 magnanimous	 was	 the
mark	 of	 a	 great	 ruler.	 Humayun	 rose.	 ‘Suleiman	 Mirza,	 go	 with	 Tariq	 Khan	 and	 a	 small	 escort	 to
locate	Sher	Shah	and	offer	him	peace,	provided	he	comes	and	makes	full	obeisance	and	compensates
us	richly	for	our	time	and	expense	and	above	all	for	the	disgraceful	insult	he	has	shown	us.’

But	Sher	Shah	did	not	respond	immediately.	Weeks	passed	while	he	procrastinated,	sending	profuse
apologies	for	delay	and	repeated	requests	to	be	permitted	to	send	messengers	to	consult	allies	before
finally	agreeing	to	any	terms.	So	it	was	that	in	mid-summer	1539,	Humayun	was	sitting	after	dinner	in
Khanzada’s	tent	placed	near	his	own	in	the	very	middle	of	his	vast	encampment	covering	more	than
four	square	miles	near	the	settlement	of	Chausa	in	Bengal.	Humayun	had	had	the	camp	erected	on	low
hillocks	overlooking	the	muddy	flood	plain	of	the	Ganges	delta.	Outside,	the	night	was	hot	and	the
smoke	from	the	camp	fires	rose	vertically	into	the	still	air.	Inside	the	tent,	whose	sides	were	down	to
protect	 the	 women	 from	 prying	 eyes,	 the	 air	 was	 stifling.	 Despite	 the	 best	 efforts	 of	 Khanzada’s
attendants	to	trap	them	using	bowls	of	sugar	water	or	to	crush	them	with	their	fly	swats,	mosquitoes
buzzed	 ceaselessly.	 Humayun,	 sweating	 profusely,	 occasionally	 felt	 their	 sharp	 bite	 on	 his	 exposed
flesh	and	slapped	futilely	at	his	small	attackers.
‘What	is	it,	Humayun?	You’ve	hardly	spoken	all	through	the	meal,’	Khanzada	asked.
‘I’m	worried	that	Sher	Shah	is	playing	me	for	a	fool,	that	I’ve	allowed	too	much	time	to	pass	by.
Suleiman	Mirza	and	Tariq	Khan	assure	me	that	on	each	visit	he	has	been	courteous	and	humble	and
seems	sincere	but	I	am	no	longer	certain.	Was	I	wrong	to	trust	so	entirely	in	Tariq	Khan?	What	if	he
was	planted	by	Sher	Shah	in	an	effort	to	gain	himself	time?’
Khanzada	rose	and	paced	for	a	moment	or	two,	face	grave	in	the	golden	glow	of	the	wicks	burning
in	their	pools	of	oil	in	the	saucer-shaped	brass	diyas.
‘I	think	you’re	right	to	be	suspicious.	Victory	doesn’t	always	go	to	the	strongest	but	sometimes	to
the	most	wily.	You	have	advanced	many	miles	down	the	Ganges	over	these	last	nine	weeks,	ready	to
meet	Sher	Shah	either	in	battle	or	in	council,	but	each	time	he	has	moved	further	off,	using	trifling
excuses	that	he’s	exhausted	the	food	in	the	region	or	that	there’s	an	epidemic	of	fever	he	must	avoid.’
‘True.	Latest	reports	are	that	his	main	army	is	still	thirty	miles	away	along	the	Ganges.’
‘What	will	you	do?’
‘Accept	no	more	excuses,	set	deadlines	for	Sher	Shah	and	if	he	doesn’t	meet	them	I’ll	attack.	But
I’m	 concerned	 that	 these	 jungles	 and	 marshes	 are	 ill-suited	 to	 the	 easy	 passage	 of	 my	 cannon	 and
large	forces	of	cavalry.’
‘Then	have	the	courage	to	retreat	to	better	terrain.	Or	else	consider	bypassing	Sher	Shah’s	forces
and	occupying	his	cities	.	.	.’	A	single	crash	of	thunder	interrupted	Khanzada’s	words.	It	was	followed
by	the	rapid	pattering	of	rain	on	the	tent	roof.
‘The	monsoon	can’t	have	broken	–	it’s	too	early.’
‘Nature’s	rhythms	are	not	always	bounded	by	man’s	calendars.’
‘If	it	is	the	monsoon,	we	must	definitely	seek	out	better	ground.	But	it’s	late	and	it’ll	be	time	enough
to	decide	in	the	morning	when	we	know	if	the	rains	are	continuing.	The	camp	is	too	high	above	the
river	for	there	to	be	any	danger	of	flooding	in	the	meantime.’
Several	 hours	 later	 Humayun	 was	 lying	 asleep	 on	 his	 back,	 his	 arms	 spread	 wide,	 his	 perspiring

muscled	body	naked	beneath	the	thin	cotton	sheet.	He	had	taken	a	long	time	to	fall	asleep,	listening	to
the	rain	which	seemed	to	be	growing	heavier	rather	than	slackening.	Now	he	was	dreaming	he	was
back	in	the	Agra	fort,	moving	towards	his	concubines’	quarters	where	for	some	reason	he	knew	they
would	 be	 bathing	 beneath	 rosewater	 fountains.	 He	 felt	 his	 body	 harden	 with	 desire	 and	 his	 legs
thrashed	 beneath	 the	 thin	 sheet	 as	 in	 his	 dreams	 he	 quickened	 his	 steps,	 eager	 to	 reach	 his	 women.
Suddenly	a	female	scream	penetrated	deep	into	his	imaginings.A	rising	crescendo	of	male	and	female
voices	followed.	One	cried,	‘To	arms!	Hurry	–	no	time	to	put	armour	on.	Reinforce	the	perimeter.’
Struggling	to	full	consciousness,	Humayun	realised	the	voices	were	real.	Raiders	must	have	got	as
far	as	the	women’s	quarters.	Tying	a	robe	about	him	and	reaching	for	his	father ’s	sword,	he	stumbled
from	his	tent.	It	was	still	raining	hard	and	his	bare	feet	slipped	in	the	wet	mud.	Peering	through	the
heavy,	 slanting	 raindrops	 and	 desperately	 trying	 to	 adjust	 his	 eyes	 to	 the	 darkness,	 he	 ran	 towards
Khanzada’s	tent.
As	 he	 got	 nearer	 he	 made	 out	 by	 the	 steely	 flashes	 of	 the	 almost	 constant	 sheet	 lightning	 a	 tall,
female	 figure	 –	 Khanzada.	 Her	 right	 hand	 was	 raised	 high	 above	 her	 head	 and	 in	 it	 was	 a	 curved
sword.	As	he	watched,	she	brought	it	down	across	the	face	of	an	assailant	who	was	trying	to	subdue
her.	The	man	fell	to	the	ground	where	he	lay	writhing	in	pain.	By	the	next	lightning	flash,	Humayun
saw	that	his	aunt’s	sword	had	slashed	open	the	man’s	face	all	down	one	side,	bloodily	exposing	his
jaw	and	teeth.	He	also	saw	that	–	unknown	to	Khanzada	–	another	attacker	was	behind	her.	He	held	not
a	sword	but	a	large	scarf	which	he	was	about	to	throw	over	her	head	and	to	pull	tight	around	her	neck.
Humayun	shouted	a	warning.
Suddenly	realising	the	danger,	Khanzada	pulled	her	arm	back	and	elbowed	the	man	in	the	throat	but
he	did	not	fall	and	continued	to	try	to	tighten	the	cloth.	By	now	Humayun	was	near	enough	to	launch
himself	upon	her	assailant	and,	grappling	with	him,	to	force	him	to	the	ground.	For	a	moment	they
struggled	 in	 the	 glossy,	 oozing	 mud,	 each	 grasping	 for	 advantage.	 Then	 Humayun	 succeeded	 in
pushing	his	right	thumb	into	his	opponent’s	left	eye	and	pressing	hard	he	felt	the	eyeball	burst	liquidly
beneath	the	force.	The	man	instinctively	relaxed	his	grip	as	the	pain	ran	through	him,	and	Humayun
took	Alamgir	and	thrust	it	deep	into	his	opponent’s	groin,	leaving	the	man	screaming	and	bleeding
into	the	muddy	puddle	in	which	he	lay	dying.
Although	the	noises	of	battle	still	reached	Humayun’s	ears	from	around	the	distant	perimeter	of	his
camp,	 by	 now	 his	 bodyguards	 seemed	 to	 have	 subdued	 the	 rest	 of	 the	 men	 who	 had	 attacked	 the
women’s	quarters.	There	had	only	been	about	twenty	or	so.	All	had	worn	dark	clothing	and	seemed	to
have	penetrated	the	heart	of	the	camp	by	stealth	while	a	stronger	force	assaulted	the	periphery.	Only
one	remained	alive.
Running	over	to	him	where	he	was	held,	arms	pinioned	and	on	his	knees,	by	two	guards,	Humayun,
face	contorted	with	rage,	grabbed	the	man	by	the	throat,	hauled	him	to	his	feet	and	pushing	his	own
face	 into	 his	 screamed,	 ‘Why	 did	 you	 do	 this?	 No	 honourable	 enemy	 attacks	 women.	 Their	 lives
should	be	protected	by	all,	whatever	the	circumstances.	Our	religion	demands	it,	as	do	all	the	moral
decencies.	You	will	die	anyway	but	if	you	speak	it	will	be	quick	–	if	you	do	not	it	will	be	long	and
lingering	and	so	exquisitely	painful	you	will	beg	for	the	death	that	is	so	slow	in	coming.’
‘We	did	not	intend	to	kill	the	women	but	to	kidnap	them,	particularly	your	aunt.	Tariq	Khan	told	us
she	was	with	you	and	the	story	of	her	capture	by	Shaibani	Khan	is	well	known	to	all.	Sher	Shah	said	if
we	took	her	you	might	be	prepared	to	come	to	terms	to	spare	her	a	second	ordeal.’
So	 Tariq	 Khan	 had	 indeed	 betrayed	 him.	 In	 his	 anger	 and	 dismay	 at	 his	 own	 stupidity,	 Humayun
tightened	his	fingers	around	the	prisoner ’s	throat	and	placing	his	thumbs	on	his	Adam’s	apple	twisted
his	 neck	 until	 he	 heard	 a	 crack	 and	 the	 death	 rattle	 bubble	 through	 the	 man’s	 throat.	 Throwing	 the

body	aside,	he	ran	–	bare	feet	again	slipping	in	the	mud	–	back	to	Khanzada.	She	was	standing	sword
still	in	hand	looking	surprisingly	composed	while	the	rain	streamed	down	her	face	and	reduced	her
long	greying	hair,	unbound	for	sleep,	to	a	series	of	rats’	tails.
‘I	am	sorry	not	to	have	protected	you	better	–	are	you	injured?’
‘Not	at	all.	I	think	I	have	proved	I	too	am	of	Timur ’s	blood,	like	you	and	my	brother	Babur.When
the	 attack	 came,	 I	 felt	 anger	 and	 outrage,	 not	 fear.	 I	 knew	 I	 must	 protect	 Gulbadan	 and	 your	 young
concubines.	I	told	them	to	collapse	the	tent	poles	and	to	remain	hidden	in	the	material	until	they	were
sure	the	danger	had	passed.	Look	over	there.	They’re	just	emerging.’
Sure	enough	Humayun	could	see	through	the	pouring	rain	Salima	crawling	from	beneath	the	vast,
enveloping	folds	of	the	tent,	followed	by	young	Gulbadan	and	the	other	women.	Humayun	embraced
Khanzada	and	as	he	did	so	he	realised	that,	now	the	immediate	danger	was	over	and	the	hot	blood	of
battle	was	ebbing	from	her,	she	was	beginning	to	shake.
‘Send	 Ahmed	 Khan	 to	 me,	 Jauhar,	 and	 find	 out	 if	 we	 can	 still	 launch	 boats	 on	 the	 Ganges.	 If	 so,
have	several	prepared	as	fast	as	the	sailors	can	so	that	my	aunt,	sister	and	concubines	can	be	rowed
upriver	to	safety.	Make	sure	an	escort	is	readied	too.	Go	now.’
Almost	immediately	Jauhar	had	left,	Ahmed	Khan	ran	up.
‘How	is	our	perimeter	withstanding	these	attacks?’	asked	Humayun.
‘Well,	 Majesty.	 After	 their	 fierce	 initial	 assault	 in	 which	 they	 made	 severe	 inroads,	 the	 enemy
seemed	to	hold	back	for	a	while	as	if	waiting	for	something.’
‘To	learn	the	success	of	their	raid	on	the	women’s	tents	.	.	.’	muttered	Humayun.	‘They	won’t	keep
back	for	long.	But	it	might	give	us	enough	time	to	prop	up	our	defences.’
‘Majesty.	The	passage	upriver	is	clear.	We’ve	boats	ready	and	a	double	crew	of	rowers	for	each,’
the	 breathless	 returning	 Jauhar	 broke	 in.	 ‘A	 strong	 detachment	 of	 cavalry	 is	 mounted	 and	 ready	 to
ride	along	the	north	bank	to	accompany	them.’
Humayun	 turned	 to	 Khanzada.	 ‘Aunt,	 you	 must	 go	 now.	 I	 trust	 in	 you	 to	 protect	 yourself	 and	 the
other	women.	I	appoint	you	to	command	the	boats.	Jauhar,	tell	the	soldiers	and	sailors	that	however
strange	they	find	it	to	obey	a	woman’s	commands,	they	must	do	so	or	face	my	wrath.’
‘They	 will	 have	 no	 need	 of	 Jauhar ’s	 words,’	 said	 Khanzada’s	 determined	 voice.	 ‘They	 will	 obey
Babur ’s	sister.	We	will	meet	again	when	you	have	your	victory.	Bring	me	the	head	of	that	slipperytongued	traitor	Tariq	Khan,	and	Sher	Shah	bound	to	serve	as	my	latrine	cleaner.’	With	that	she	turned
and	swiftly	picked	her	way	over	the	mud	to	Gulbadan	and	the	other	women,	then	led	them	towards	the
riverbank,	soon	disappearing	into	the	rain	and	gloom.
How	 brave	 she	 was,	 Humayun	 thought.	 How	 strong	 the	 blood	 of	 Timur	 ran	 in	 her	 slight	 and	 no
longer	youthful	body.	He	had	been	foolish,	oh	so	foolish,	to	trust	in	Tariq	Khan	and	to	believe	in	Sher
Shah’s	 crafty	 delaying	 answers.	 Why	 hadn’t	 he	 questioned	 their	 motives	 more	 rigorously?	 Had	 he
been	too	content	to	relax	into	the	pleasures	of	the	haram?	Now	he	must	redeem	his	lapses	of	mental
concentration	by	his	physical	courage	and	use	it	to	inspire	his	men	to	victory.
‘Ahmed	Khan,	get	further	reports	from	our	defences.	Jauhar,	bring	me	my	armour,	then	saddle	my
horse.’
In	the	quarter	of	an	hour	it	took	Humayun	to	ready	himself	fully	for	battle,	it	had	begun	to	grow
light.	 Several	 of	 his	 commanders,	 led	 by	 Baba	 Yasaval,	 had	 joined	 him.	 ‘The	 situation	 is	 serious,
Majesty.	Sher	Shah	is	attacking	with	renewed	force.	We	cannot	move	the	cannon	into	firing	positions.
Look	over	there.’	Following	the	direction	of	his	officer ’s	pointing	arm,	Humayun	saw	a	number	of
his	artillerymen	lashing	a	double	team	of	oxen	yoked	to	one	of	his	largest	bronze	guns	in	an	attempt
to	turn	it	to	face	the	enemy	threat.	But	however	hard	they	were	hit,	however	much	they	were	cajoled,

the	 great	 beasts	 stumbled	 and	 slipped	 in	 the	 mud,	 sinking	 ever	 deeper	 into	 the	 quagmire.	 When	 the
men	added	their	own	weight	to	that	of	the	animals,	they	too	could	make	no	impression,	some	simply
falling	full	length	in	the	churned	brown	mud.
‘Majesty,	it’s	the	same	with	all	the	guns,’	said	Baba	Yasaval.
‘I	 believe	 you.	 Besides,	 the	 downpour	 is	 such	 it’ll	 be	 difficult	 for	 either	 the	 gunners	 or	 the
musketeers	 to	 keep	 the	 gunpowder	 dry	 or	 light	 their	 fuses.	 We	 must	 rely	 on	 our	 bravery	 in	 close
combat	with	the	old	weapons	of	cold	steel.	We	still	have	many	more	men	than	our	enemies.	Get	the
officers	to	marshal	them	in	the	best	defensive	positions	they	can	improvise.	Use	the	wagons	and	tents
as	barricades	.	.	.’	Humayun	paused	and	then	–	still	conscious	of	the	perilous	position	of	his	aunt	and
the	 other	 women	 and	 that	 it	 was	 his	 complacency	 and	 naive	 gullibility	 that	 had	 exposed	 them	 to
danger	–	commanded,	‘Send	another	strong	detachment	of	cavalry	–	ten	thousand	men	including	half
my	own	bodyguard	–	back	along	the	riverbank	to	add	to	the	protection	of	the	royal	women.’
‘But	we	need	them	here,	Majesty.’
‘Don’t	question	my	orders.	It’s	a	matter	of	honour	to	save	them.’
Baba	Yasaval	did	not	argue	further	but	despatched	a	messenger	with	the	instruction.
‘Now,	Baba	Yasaval,	where	will	my	presence	help	the	most?’
‘Over	there	to	the	northwest,	Majesty.	Enemy	cavalry	broke	through	our	pickets	and	attacked	our
infantry	 while	 they	 were	 still	 in	 their	 tents	 and	 killed	 many	 before	 they	 could	 defend	 themselves.
Some	 ran	 away.	 Only	 by	 rushing	 reinforcements	 of	 Badahkshanis	 and	 Tajiks	 into	 position	 have	 we
been	able	to	hold	the	line,	and	even	then	only	some	distance	back	from	our	original	perimeter.’
‘To	the	northwest	then.’	Humayun	mounted	his	black	stallion	and,	with	the	half	of	his	bodyguard
that	he	had	not	sent	to	protect	the	women	around	him,	made	his	way	over	to	the	northwest	defences	as
fast	as	he	could.	In	the	muddy	conditions	the	horses	sometimes	sank	up	to	their	hocks.	When	one	rider
tried	 to	 push	 his	 mount	 too	 hard,	 it	 stumbled	 and	 fell,	 fracturing	 a	 hind	 leg	 which	 had	 stuck	 in	 the
mud.
Approaching	 the	 area	 of	 his	 camp	 which	 had	 become	 the	 front	 lines,	 Humayun	 saw	 that	 his
commanders	had	got	howdahs	on	to	a	dozen	war	elephants	and	brought	them	forward.	Protected	by
the	canopies	of	the	howdahs	from	the	seemingly	unceasing	rain,	some	of	his	musketeers	had	actually
succeeded	in	priming	and	firing	their	long-barrelled	weapons	and	bringing	down	into	the	mud	a	few
of	 Sher	 Shah’s	 attackers.	 Taking	 a	 little	 heart	 from	 their	 success,	 small	 bands	 of	 his	 infantry	 were
firing	volleys	of	arrows	from	the	cover	of	overturned	baggage	wagons	and	forcing	Sher	Shah’s	men,
in	turn,	to	shelter	behind	five	of	Humayun’s	large	cannon	which	they	had	overrun	in	their	first	assault.
As	he	reached	the	forward	position,	Humayun	shouted	to	his	men.	‘Thank	you,	my	brave	soldiers
one	and	all.	You’ve	blunted	the	enemy’s	attack.	Now	it	is	time	to	recover	our	great	cannon.	To	allow
Sher	Shah’s	rabble	to	carry	them	off	would	be	a	dishonour.	I	will	lead	you.	Elephant	drivers	advance.
Musketeers,	shoot	down	more	of	those	insolent	rebels	for	me.’
Humayun	 waited	 impatiently	 for	 the	 elephants	 to	 begin	 to	 move	 forward.	 Eventually	 they	 did	 so,
lurching	through	the	mud	and	making	the	howdahs	on	their	backs	sway	so	much	that	it	was	difficult
for	 the	 musketeers	 to	 steady	 their	 weapons	 to	 shoot	 accurately.	 Humayun	 waved	 his	 horsemen
forward	too.	As	they	approached	the	captured	cannon,	Humayun	saw	a	group	of	Sher	Shah’s	gunners
run	from	the	shelter	of	one	of	the	largest	bronze	cannons	towards	a	beige-coloured	tent	belonging	to
Humayun’s	infantry	that	had	apparently	remained	standing	after	his	men	had	retreated.	Suddenly	these
gunners	 pulled	 away	 the	 front	 of	 the	 tent	 to	 reveal	 a	 sixth	 captured	 cannon	 that	 they	 had	 somehow
managed	to	drag	inside	the	tent	and	to	get	dry	enough	to	fire.	Immediately	an	artilleryman,	who	had
been	hidden	within	the	tent,	applied	a	light	to	the	fuse.

With	a	loud	bang	and	lots	of	billowing	white	smoke,	the	ball	flew	from	the	cannon’s	mouth,	hitting
the	 foremost	 of	 Humayun’s	 advancing	 elephants	 squarely	 in	 its	 great	 domed	 forehead.	 Mortally
wounded,	 the	 elephant	 at	 once	 fell	 sideways,	 dislodging	 its	 howdah	 and	 throwing	 the	 musketeers,
arms	and	legs	flailing,	to	the	ground.The	elephant	behind	panicked	and	ran	forward,	squashing	one	of
the	fallen	musketeers	into	the	mud	beneath	its	feet.	As	he	struggled	to	regain	control	of	his	charge,
which	had	its	head	back	and	grey	trunk	raised	and	was	trumpeting	in	fear,	one	of	this	elephant’s	two
drivers	also	tumbled	from	its	neck	but	the	other	held	on	and	seemed	to	be	succeeding	in	restraining
his	mount.
However,	by	now	all	Humayun’s	attention	was	on	the	cannon	which	had	fired	the	shot.The	gunners
were	frantically	trying	to	reload	it.	They	had	taken	a	linen	bag	of	powder	from	the	metal	chest	which
had	kept	it	dry	and	succeeded	in	ramming	it	down	the	cannon	barrel.	Two	of	them	were	struggling	to
lift	 a	 metal	 cannon	 ball,	 ready	 to	 roll	 it	 down	 the	 barrel	 after	 the	 powder,	 when	 Humayun	 reached
them.	Bending	low	from	the	saddle	of	his	black	horse,	Humayun’s	first	stroke	with	Alamgir	almost
severed	the	arm	of	one	of	the	men	lifting	the	ball.	He	fell	to	the	ground	together	with	the	cannon	ball,
blood	spurting	from	his	wound.	Humayun	cut	at	the	face	of	the	other	man	but	the	gunner	got	his	arm
up	to	protect	it.	Nevertheless,	his	arm	was	badly	gashed	and,	turning,	he	began	to	run.	He	had	got	no
more	than	a	couple	of	paces	before	Humayun’s	sword	caught	him	in	the	flesh	at	the	back	of	his	neck,
above	his	chain	mail	and	below	his	domed	steel	helmet,	and	he	too	crumpled	to	the	ground.	By	this
time	 Humayun’s	 bodyguard	 had	 killed	 or	 put	 to	 flight	 the	 remainder	 of	 the	 enemy	 gunners	 and	 his
musketeers	were	dismounting	from	the	elephants.
‘Good	work.	Order	the	remaining	infantry	to	advance	to	protect	the	cannon.	Our	success	will	give
them	renewed	confidence.	I	must	return	to	the	centre	of	the	camp.’
With	that,	Humayun	turned	his	horse,	which	was	already	blowing	hard	from	its	charge	through	the
clinging	mud,	towards	his	scarlet	command	tent.Visibility	had	much	improved	as	the	rain,	which	had
slackened	during	his	attack	on	the	guns,	had	by	now	almost	ceased.	From	the	centre	he	would	be	able
to	direct	a	further	strengthening	of	his	position,	Humayun	thought.
However,	he	had	covered	scarcely	half	the	distance	to	his	tent	when	Jauhar	galloped	up.	‘Majesty,’
he	gasped,	‘Baba	Yasaval	asked	me	to	beg	your	presence	on	the	far	southwestern	perimeter.	A	large
force	 of	 Sher	 Shah’s	 cavalry	 is	 attacking	 along	 the	 bank	 of	 the	 Ganges.	 They	 have	 already	 broken
through	our	front	lines	and	the	vanguard	are	deep	among	our	makeshift	secondary	defences.’
Immediately	Humayun	pulled	the	head	of	his	black	horse	round	and	the	willing	beast,	responding
to	his	urging,	began	to	pick	up	pace	towards	the	west	past	the	neat	lines	of	tents	hastily	abandoned	by
Humayun’s	 men	 as	 they	 had	 rushed	 earlier	 to	 repel	 the	 unexpected	 attackers.	 He	 was	 followed	 by
Jauhar	and	his	bodyguards.
Very	soon	Humayun	could	hear	increasing	cries	and	sounds	of	battle	and	then,	breasting	a	low	rise,
he	looked	down	on	the	wide,	muddy	banks	of	the	Ganges	and	a	scene	of	chaos.	Several	bands	of	Sher
Shah’s	cavalry	had	breached	his	front	line	and	his	own	cavalry	were	trying	to	encircle	them	or	drive
them	 back.	 Other	 mounted	 officers,	 waving	 their	 swords,	 were	 encouraging	 groups	 of	 his	 infantry
forward	to	fill	gaps	in	the	defences	but	they	seemed	to	be	having	only	limited	success.	Indeed	some	of
the	infantrymen	were	fleeing	towards	the	rear,	throwing	down	the	small	round	shields	and	the	long
spears	with	which	they	were	armed.
Most	ominously	of	all,	only	a	mile	or	so	from	his	wavering	defences	another	large	force	of	Sher
Shah’s	cavalry	was	forming	up	to	launch	a	further	attack.	At	their	centre	was	a	knot	of	bright	flags
and	pennants	and	to	Humayun	it	seemed	obvious	that	Sher	Shah	was	there,	ready	to	lead	this	charge	in
person	finally	to	overwhelm	his	enemies.

‘We’ve	only	got	a	short	time	to	prepare	to	confront	them,	Jauhar.	Where	are	Baba	Yasaval	and	my
other	commanders?’
‘When	I	left	to	find	you,	Majesty,	Baba	Yasaval	was	a	little	further	along	this	rise	with	some	of	his
junior	officers.	But	he	told	me	the	situation	was	so	perilous	that	he	could	not	wait	for	your	arrival	but
would	 straightaway	 lead	 an	 attack	 on	 some	 of	 the	 enemy	 cavalry	 that	 had	 already	 broken	 through.
Isn’t	 that	 his	 yellow	 flag	 at	 the	 head	 of	 those	 riders	 over	 there,	 driving	 that	 group	 of	 our	 enemy
before	them?’
‘You	have	good	eyes,	Jauhar.	Get	a	message	to	him	to	bring	as	many	men	as	he	can	detach	to	meet
me	 by	 that	 cluster	 of	 grey	 tents	 over	 there.	 Send	 further	 messengers	 to	 summon	 any	 other	 officers
who	can	break	off	from	the	action	to	lead	their	men	there	too.	We’ll	meet	Sher	Shah’s	advance	head
on.	The	ground	around	those	tents	looks	firm	enough	for	us	to	be	able	to	get	up	enough	speed	to	do
them	some	damage	with	the	weight	of	our	initial	charge.’
Only	ten	minutes	later	Humayun	had	a	number	of	his	officers	around	him.	He	was	saddened	how
many	including	Baba	Yasaval	–	who	was	helmetless	and	had	a	bloody,	yellow	cloth	wound	around	his
head	–	were	wounded,	and	even	more	how	many	were	missing.	‘Where	is	Suleiman	Mirza?’
‘Dead,	Majesty,	killed	by	a	spear	thrust	as	he	attempted	to	fight	off	cavalry.’
‘And	Ahmed	Khan?’
‘Badly	wounded.	In	the	very	first	minutes	of	Sher	Shah’s	attack	while	he	was	inspecting	the	pickets
two	arrows	hit	him	in	the	thigh.	Some	of	his	men	found	him	weak	from	loss	of	blood	and	got	him
over	 to	 the	 opposite	 side	 of	 the	 Ganges	 along	 with	 other	 wounded.	 They’re	 being	 cared	 for	 by	 the
men	you	stationed	there.’
‘We	must	manage	without	these	brave	officers,	trusting	in	our	own	courage	and	in	our	destiny.’
Looking	 round,	 Humayun	 saw	 that	 his	 commanders	 had	 assembled	 a	 sizeable	 force,	 perhaps	 as
many	 as	 five	 thousand	 riders,	 to	 confront	 Sher	 Shah’s	 next	 attack	 which,	 from	 the	 increasing
movement	amongst	his	opponents’	ranks,	would	not	be	long	delayed.
‘As	soon	as	Sher	Shah’s	lines	advance,	so	too	do	we.	Make	for	the	centre	where	I	believe	he	will
ride	himself.	If	we	can	kill	or	capture	him,	his	men	will	become	demoralised.	Despite	our	losses	the
day	will	be	ours	.	.	.’
Moments	 later,	 Sher	 Shah	 put	 his	 cavalry	 into	 motion,	 galloping	 increasingly	 quickly	 towards
Humayun’s	 defences.	 Humayun	 took	 Alamgir	 from	 its	 jewelled	 scabbard	 and	 waving	 it	 above	 his
head	yelled,	‘Charge!	Let	it	be	a	matter	of	honour	to	die	rather	than	to	retreat.’
Soon	his	whole	force	was	galloping	as	fast	as	the	mud	and	puddles	would	allow.	Humayun’s	tall
black	 horse,	 despite	 its	 previous	 efforts,	 kept	 him	 at	 the	 head	 of	 his	 troops,	 closing	 fast	 with	 his
opponents	 who	 were	 themselves	 racing	 forward,	 weapons	 extended,	 shouting	 ‘Tiger,	 Tiger ’	 in
celebration	of	their	leader,	Sher	Shah.
All	his	thoughts	now	concentrated	on	the	coming	fight,	Humayun	bent	low	over	his	stallion’s	neck
and	 kept	 its	 head	 aimed	 at	 the	 very	 centre	 of	 Sher	 Shah’s	 galloping	 ranks	 where	 he	 saw	 a	 blackbearded	man	in	bright	steel	armour	on	a	white	horse	shouting	encouragement	to	those	around	him	as
he	 rode.	 It	 could	 only	 be	 Sher	 Shah	 himself.	 Humayun	 pulled	 on	 his	 reins	 once	 more	 to	 bring	 him
directly	into	Sher	Shah’s	path.	Within	seconds	the	two	lines	clashed.	Humayun	slashed	at	Sher	Shah
with	 Alamgir	 but	 the	 sword	 slid	 harmlessly	 off	 his	 steel	 breastplate	 and	 in	 a	 moment	 the	 press	 of
forces	had	separated	them.
Suddenly,	 Humayun	 thought	 he	 saw	 the	 traitorous	 Tariq	 Khan	 mounted	 on	 a	 brown	 horse	 and
wearing	 his	 familiar	 dark	 green	 beneath	 his	 armour.	 Humayun	 urged	 his	 own	 mount	 towards	 him.
Although	 hampered	 by	 the	 disorganised	 mass	 of	 wheeling,	 rearing	 and	 snorting	 horses	 with	 their

riders	slashing	and	striking	at	each	other,	Humayun	reached	the	green-clad	man.	It	was	indeed	Tariq
Khan.
‘Tariq	Khan,	your	life	is	forfeit.	Face	me	and	die	like	a	man,	not	the	slippery	snake	you	are.’	With
that,	Humayun	struck	at	Tariq	Khan	but	his	opponent	quickly	got	his	shield	up	and	deflected	the	blow
and	 at	 the	 same	 time	 swung	 wildly	 at	 Humayun	 with	 his	 double-headed	 steel	 battleaxe.	 Humayun
leaned	back	in	his	saddle	and	the	axe	only	hissed	through	empty	air	but	Humayun	thrust	Alamgir	deep
into	 Tariq	 Khan’s	 unprotected	 armpit,	 exposed	 as	 he	 made	 his	 axe-sweep.	 With	 a	 cry	 of	 pain	 Tariq
Khan	 dropped	 the	 axe	 and,	 as	 blood	 poured	 from	 his	 armpit	 staining	 his	 dark	 green	 clothing,	 he
seemed	 to	 lose	 control	 of	 his	 brown	 horse	 which	 carried	 him	 off	 into	 the	 mêlée.	 Moments	 later,
Humayun	saw	him	fall,	sliding	backwards	from	the	saddle	of	his	rearing	mount	to	be	trampled	into
the	muddy	ground	beneath	the	hooves	of	other	horses.	So	perish	all	traitors,	thought	Humayun.
Looking	round,	he	realised	most	of	his	bodyguards	had	lost	touch	with	him,	but	shouting	hoarsely
to	the	few	who	remained	to	follow	he	turned	his	own	black	horse,	now	covered	with	white,	frothing
sweat,	towards	where	he	calculated	Sher	Shah’s	charge	might	have	taken	him.	As	he	pushed	forward,
a	riderless	horse,	blood	streaming	from	a	deep	sword	slash	to	the	rump,	crashed	into	the	right	flank
of	his	own,	knocking	it	off	course	and	for	a	moment	painfully	trapping	Humayun’s	mail-clad	thigh
against	his	saddle.	Then,	neighing	shrilly,	it	careered	away,	veering	straight	across	the	path	of	one	of
Humayun’s	 remaining	 bodyguards.	 The	 bodyguard’s	 horse	 stumbled	 and	 fell,	 throwing	 its	 young
rider	over	its	neck	on	to	the	ground.	He	lost	his	domed	helmet	on	impact,	rolled	over	two	or	three
times	and	then	lay	still.
Regaining	control	of	his	horse	once	more,	Humayun	urged	it	towards	where	the	fight	seemed	the
most	intense.	Suddenly	thunder	crashed	overhead	and	immediately	rain	began	to	fall	again	in	torrents,
heavy	drops	splashing	into	puddles	and	dripping	from	the	rim	of	Humayun’s	helmet	before	running
down	into	his	eyes.	He	removed	his	leather	gauntlet	and	raised	his	right	hand	to	brush	the	rain	away
and	clear	his	vision.	But	his	action	prevented	him	from	seeing	two	dark-clad	riders	dashing	towards
him	 until	 they	 were	 almost	 upon	 him.	 When	 he	 did,	 he	 swerved	 away	 from	 the	 first	 but	 could	 not
prevent	the	sharp	sword	of	the	second	slicing	into	the	exposed	flesh	of	his	hand	and	wrist	and	sliding
down	into	his	forearm,	pushing	back	his	chain	mail	and	penetrating	deeper	as	it	went	on.	His	black
horse	carried	him	away	from	his	assailants,	who	failed	to	turn	quickly	enough	in	the	mud	to	pursue
him.
Bright	 scarlet	 blood	 was	 streaming	 from	 Humayun’s	 wounded	 right	 arm	 and	 hand	 and	 flowing
down	and	through	his	fingers,	coating	Timur ’s	ring.	He	tried	to	untie	his	cream	neck	cloth	with	his
left	hand	to	use	it	to	staunch	the	wound	but	he	could	not.	His	numb	right	fingers	could	scarcely	keep	a
grip	on	his	reins.	He	began	to	feel	light-headed	and	white	flashes	started	to	appear	before	his	eyes.
Through	them	he	could	just	about	make	out	that	there	were	none	of	his	men	around	him.	The	situation
was	bad	but	surely	he	was	not	destined	to	end	like	this?	Defeat	was	not	inevitable.	He	must	get	back	to
his	 men	 to	 rally	 them.	 Humayun	 tugged	 at	 the	 reins	 with	 the	 last	 of	 his	 strength,	 trying	 to	 turn	 his
tired,	blowing	horse	in	what	his	blurring	mind	imagined	was	the	direction	of	his	remaining	men.	He
kicked	the	horse’s	sides	to	urge	it	on,	then	slumped	forward	on	to	its	black	neck,	clinging	to	its	mane
with	his	left	hand	as	the	last	remnants	of	his	consciousness	deserted	him.

‘Majesty.’
Humayun’s	opening	eyes	throbbed	with	bright	light	and	he	half	closed	them	again.	The	glare	was
the	same	when	he	tried	again.	Slowly	he	realised	he	was	lying	on	his	back	staring	up	into	the	midday
sun.
‘Majesty.’The	same	voice	came	again	and	a	hand	tentatively	shook	his	shoulder.	He	was	no	longer
wearing	 armour	 or	 chain	 mail.	 Where	 had	 it	 gone?	 Was	 he	 captured?	 He	 turned	 his	 clearing	 head
towards	the	voice	and	slowly	a	nut-brown	face	came	into	focus,	a	concerned,	anxious	expression	on
its	small	features.
‘Who	are	you?’
‘My	name	is	Nizam.	I’m	one	of	the	water-carriers	in	your	army.’
‘Where	am	I?’
‘On	the	banks	of	the	Ganges,	Majesty.	I	was	gathering	water	from	the	river	in	my	leather	bottles	to
take	to	your	soldiers	when	I	saw	your	black	horse	coming	slowly	towards	me	from	the	direction	of
the	battle	a	mile	or	so	from	here,	with	yourself	slumped	over	its	neck.	When	it	got	nearer	the	horse’s
knees	buckled	and	it	collapsed.	As	it	did	so,	you	slid	to	the	ground.’
‘Where	is	the	horse	now?	Where	are	my	men?’
‘The	horse	is	over	there.	It	is	dead,	Majesty,	from	exhaustion	I	think,	even	though	it	had	many	small
wounds	and	a	larger	one	to	its	rump.’
Feeling	a	little	stronger,	Humayun	raised	himself	on	his	left	elbow	and	there	indeed	was	his	black
stallion	no	more	than	twenty	paces	away	lying	neck	outstretched,	tongue	lolling.	Clusters	of	greenblack	flies	were	already	forming	around	its	mouth	and	nostrils	and	on	its	many	wounds.
‘And	my	men?’
‘Mostly	they	retreated	east	down	the	riverbank	closely	followed	by	Sher	Shah’s	force	who	struck
many	from	their	saddles.	Some	crossed	the	river	where	it	is	low,	about	a	quarter	of	a	mile	from	here,
to	the	opposite	bank	where	some	of	your	troops	still	are.’
‘Was	I	not	pursued?’
‘No.	And	it’s	difficult	to	see	this	particular	place	because	of	the	banks	and	mud	spits,	so	no	one	has
come	since.	Do	you	wish	to	drink,	Majesty?’
‘Please.’	Instinctively	Humayun	tried	to	extend	his	right	arm	for	the	bottle.	It	was	stiff	and	numb.
Remembrance	of	the	fight	and	his	wound	came	back	to	him.	His	arm	felt	bandaged.	Looking	at	it	he
realised	that	it	was	–	with	the	same	cream	neck	cloth	he	had	himself	failed	to	untie,	and	there	seemed
to	be	something	like	a	flat	pebble	bound	against	the	worst	of	his	wound.
‘Help	me	to	drink.’
Nizam	took	the	stopper	from	one	of	his	large	water	bottles,	which	seemed	from	its	size	and	shape
to	have	been	made	from	the	skin	of	an	entire	small	goat.	Supporting	Humayun’s	head,	Nizam	poured
a	 little	 into	 his	 mouth.	 Humayun	 drank	 quickly,	 then	 asked	 for	 more.	 With	 each	 gulp	 he	 felt	 life
returning	to	him.
‘Did	you	bind	the	wound?’
‘Yes,	Majesty.	I	have	often	watched	the	hakims	at	work	after	battles	and	one	told	me	that	a	small	flat
stone	was	good	to	keep	pressure	on	a	cut	to	stop	the	loss	of	lifeblood.’
‘It	clearly	worked.	You’ve	done	well.	How	did	you	know	I	was	your	emperor?’
‘By	your	tiger	ring	and	your	jewelled	sword.	I’ve	often	been	told	of	them	in	the	camp.’
Humayun	 was	 fully	 conscious	 now	 and	 sitting	 up	 realised	 that	 he	 did	 have	 both	 the	 ring	 and	 his
father ’s	sword	Alamgir,	which	either	he	or	Nizam	had	put	back	into	its	scabbard.
The	 midday	 sun	 was	 beating	 down,	 causing	 the	 wet	 ground	 to	 steam	 in	 an	 eerie	 semblance	 of

morning	 mist.	 Scrutinising	 his	 saviour,	 Humayun	 saw	 that	 Nizam,	 who	 was	 wearing	 only	 a	 rough
black	cotton	tunic,	was	small,	skinny	and	mud-streaked	–	probably	no	more	than	thirteen	or	fourteen
years	old.	Nevertheless,	he	could	easily	have	stripped	Humayun	of	his	possessions	and	run	but	instead
he	had	loyally	stayed	with	him.	Humayun	realised	that	–	although	defeated	as	he	surely	had	been	–	he
still	deserved	his	birth	name	of	‘Fortunate’	bestowed	on	him	by	his	father	Babur.	One	defeat	was	of
little	matter.	Babur	had	suffered	many	setbacks.	‘It	is	how	you	deal	with	them,’	he	remembered	Babur
saying.	Then	Humayun’s	head	swam	again.	Pulling	himself	back	to	the	present,	he	knew	that	his	first
task	must	be	to	rejoin	his	army.
‘Where	are	the	nearest	of	my	soldiers,	Nizam?’
‘As	I	told	you,	those	on	this	side	of	the	river	have	mostly	retreated	far	off.	But	there	remain	many
on	 the	 opposite	 shore	 –	 see.’	 Nizam	 pointed	 across	 the	 steaming,	 muddy	 banks	 and	 over	 the	 main
branch	of	the	Ganges.	There	Humayun	made	out	a	large	group	of	horsemen.
‘Are	you	sure	they’re	mine?’
‘Yes,	Majesty.	The	detachment	over	there	has	been	joined	by	many	from	this	side.’
Nizam	 must	 be	 right,	 thought	 Humayun.	 He	 had	 been	 wise	 to	 take	 the	 precaution	 of	 stationing	 a
force	 on	 the	 opposite	 bank	 to	 prevent	 Sher	 Shah	 from	 bypassing	 his	 army,	 crossing	 the	 river	 and
attacking	him	from	the	rear.
‘I	must	join	them.’	As	he	spoke,	Humayun	scrambled	to	his	feet	but	his	legs	shook	under	him	and
he	again	felt	dizzy.
‘Lean	on	me,	Majesty.’
Humayun	gratefully	put	his	left	arm	on	Nizam’s	bony	shoulder.	‘Help	me	down	to	the	river	so	that	I
can	swim	across.’
‘But	you	are	too	weak.	You	will	drown.’
‘I	must	make	the	attempt.	It	would	be	a	great	dishonour	to	be	captured.’
Nizam’s	eyes	glanced	around	and	alighted	on	his	two	large	goatskin	water	bottles	and	he	looked	up
into	Humayun’s	face.	‘Can	you	stand	for	a	minute	alone,	Majesty?	I	think	I	have	the	answer.’
Receiving	 a	 nod	 from	 Humayun,	 he	 ran	 over	 to	 the	 bottles	 and	 pulling	 out	 the	 rough	 stoppers
emptied	them.	Then,	to	Humayun’s	surprise,	he	took	the	larger	of	them,	placed	the	filling	hole	to	his
lips	 and	 began	 to	 blow,	 dark	 eyes	 bulging	 and	 thin	 cheeks	 puffing	 out	 with	 effort.	 After	 some
moments,	 Humayun	 saw	 the	 skin	 begin	 to	 inflate	 and	 soon	 it	 became	 taut	 and	 full	 of	 air.	 Nizam
inserted	the	stopper	and	brought	it	over	to	Humayun.	Then	he	swiftly	blew	up	the	second	and,	tapping
it	 playfully,	 smiled.	 ‘That	 should	 do.	 We	 must	 hurry,	 Majesty.	 Soon	 Sher	 Shah’s	 men	 will	 be
dispersing	to	look	for	booty	on	the	corpses	of	their	enemies.	I’ve	hidden	your	armour	so	that	it	won’t
catch	the	light,	but	they’re	bound	to	inspect	the	whole	shore.’
‘I	 know,	 but	 first	 help	 me	 to	 my	 brave	 horse.	 I	 must	 check	 he	 is	 dead	 or	 else	 put	 him	 out	 of	 his
misery.	He	has	served	me	well.’	An	inspection	quickly	satisfied	Humayun	that	the	black	stallion	was
indeed	 dead.	 Then,	 leaning	 on	 Nizam’s	 shoulder,	 he	 slowly	 picked	 his	 way	 across	 the	 hillocks	 and
flats	towards	the	river.	He	fell	at	least	twice	but	on	each	occasion	Nizam	–	already	burdened	by	the
inflated	 water	 bottles	 –	 hauled	 him	 to	 his	 feet.	 After	 ten	 minutes’	 struggle,	 the	 pair	 reached	 the
Ganges.	Nizam	passed	the	water	bottles	to	Humayun.
‘Thank	you,	Nizam.	Now	be	gone	and	save	yourself.’
‘No,	Majesty,	I	will	accompany	you	or	else	you	will	drown.’
‘Help	me	off	with	my	boots	then,’	said	Humayun,	half	sitting,	half	collapsing	on	to	the	bank.	Soon
Nizam	had	tugged	the	heavy	boots	off	and,	being	all	the	time	barefoot	himself,	helped	Humayun	into
the	water.

‘Swim	with	your	legs	and	your	good	arm,	Majesty.	Try	to	keep	one	bottle	under	your	right	arm	and
the	second	beneath	your	chin.	I	will	help	direct	you.’
Slowly	they	succeeded	in	reaching	what	to	Humayun	seemed	the	middle	of	the	river.	His	right	arm
was	stinging	intensely	from	contact	with	the	water	but	the	pain	had	cleared	his	mind.	He	mustn’t	die	–
it	wasn’t	his	destiny	–	and	he	kicked	harder	with	his	feet.	Nizam	had	clearly	been	brought	up	on	the
water	and	was	pushing	and	pulling	at	Humayun	to	keep	him	headed	for	the	far	shore.	A	few	minutes
later,	 they	 were	 only	 five	 yards	 from	 the	 south	 bank	 when	 Nizam	 suddenly	 became	 frantic,	 legs
thrashing	at	the	water	and	arms	pulling	at	Humayun.	‘It’s	a	crocodile,	Majesty	–	he	must	have	scented
your	blood.	I	saw	the	snout	not	far	off.	Hurry!’
Humayun	took	another	two	strokes	and,	as	he	put	his	feet	down,	soft	mud	oozed	beneath	his	toes.
Summoning	his	last	reserves	of	strength	he	staggered,	dripping	and	breathless,	from	the	water,	Nizam
at	his	side.
‘We	must	get	further	up	the	bank,	Majesty.’
With	 Nizam’s	 help	 Humayun	 stumbled	 another	 ten	 yards.	 From	 this	 place	 of	 relative	 safety,	 he
looked	back	to	see	the	crocodile’s	amber	eyes	and	snout	breaking	the	surface	near	the	shore.	As	he
watched,	the	reptile	turned	and	slunk	sinuously	away	into	deeper	water.	Perhaps	it	had	been	too	small
to	finish	him	off	but	he	was	glad	not	to	have	to	find	out.
‘Majesty,	I	will	find	some	of	your	officers,	tell	them	of	your	plight	and	ask	them	to	send	people	to
bring	you	back	to	your	army.	Then	I	must	swim	back	across	the	river	–	I	need	to	find	my	father.	He	is
one	of	the	cooks	in	your	field	kitchens	and	I	haven’t	seen	him	since	Sher	Shah’s	first	attack.’
‘But	you	did	not	mention	him	till	now?’
‘I	knew	it	was	my	duty	to	help	you.’
‘You	must	return	to	me	so	I	can	reward	your	bravery	and	your	loyalty.’
‘No,	Majesty	–	I	must	find	my	father,’	Nizam	replied,	his	small	face	set.
A	 strange	 thought	 came	 into	 Humayun’s	 head.	 Impulsively	 he	 blurted	 it	 out.	 ‘You	 have	 been	 a
prince	 among	 water-carriers.	 When	 I	 am	 back	 in	 my	 capital,	 come	 to	 me	 and	 you	 shall	 sit	 on	 my
throne	and	be	a	true	king,	giving	orders	for	an	hour	or	two.	Whatever	you	command	shall	be	done.’
Nizam	 looked	 puzzled	 then	 smiled	 hesitantly	 and	 stammered,	 ‘Yes,	 Majesty,’	 before	 turning	 and
running	 swiftly	 over	 the	 undulating	 muddy	 banks	 of	 the	 Ganges	 in	 the	 direction	 of	 Humayun’s
remaining	forces.

Chapter	7
A	Promise	Kept
Humayun	looked	around	at	those	of	his	officers	who	had	rejoined	him	in	his	makeshift	headquarters
twenty	miles	up	the	Ganges	from	Chausa,	the	site	of	the	battle	two	days	previously.	Suleiman	Mirza
was	of	course	dead	and	Humayun	had	taken	part	in	the	mullahs’	solemn	prayers	for	him	and	the	other
fallen.	 Baba	 Yasaval	 was	 there,	 however,	 bandaged	 more	 heavily	 than	 Humayun	 himself.	 So	 too
amazingly	was	Ahmed	Khan,	his	face	pale	and	drawn	above	his	stringy	brown	beard.	His	wounded
thigh	was	strapped	and	he	was	leaning	on	a	stout	wooden	crutch.
Only	a	few	minutes	after	Nizam	had	left	Humayun	on	the	banks	of	the	Ganges	a	detachment	of	his
cavalry	 had	 reached	 him.	 The	 hakims	 had	 washed	 and	 stitched	 together	 the	 sides	 of	 the	 long,	 deep
wound	in	his	hand	and	forearm,	dressed	it	with	ointments	and	bound	it	in	fine	muslin	bandages	but	he
had	refused	their	offer	of	opium	to	deaden	the	pain.	He	needed	more	than	ever	to	think	clearly.	He
was	 pleased	 to	 find	 he	 could	 still	 move	 his	 fingers	 but	 the	 wound	 sometimes	 felt	 hot,	 sometimes
numb,	and	stung	unbearably	every	time	it	caught	against	anything.	But	above	all,	he	was	glad	to	be
alive.	He	had	suffered	a	major	defeat	but	was	determined	to	recover	his	lost	lands	just	as	his	father
Babur	had	done	when	he’d	faced	adversity.
‘Ahmed	Khan,	what	are	Sher	Shah’s	latest	movements?’	he	asked.
‘He	hasn’t	moved	beyond	Chausa.	He	and	his	men	are	dividing	the	contents	of	our	treasure	chests
and	attempting	to	extricate	our	cannon	from	the	muddy	banks	of	the	Ganges	before	its	waters	rise	so
far	that	they	cover	them.	Like	us,	they	have	lost	many	men.	Others	will	probably	slip	off	home	once
they	have	their	booty.’
‘You’re	 sure	 of	 all	 this,	 Ahmed	 Khan?	 You	 failed	 to	 warn	 previously	 of	 the	 imminence	 of	 Sher
Shah’s	attack.’
‘Yes,	Majesty.’	Ahmed	Khan	lowered	his	head	and	paused	before	continuing.	‘Like	many	others	I
was	deluded	into	thinking	that	Sher	Shah	wanted	peace.	Although	I	sent	out	scouts,	perhaps	I	did	not
send	out	enough.	And	perhaps	they	themselves	were	not	vigilant	enough	.	.	.	and	then	there	was	the
weather	.	.	.	and	the	speed	of	movement	of	Sher	Shah’s—’
Humayun	 held	 up	 his	 hand	 to	 halt	 Ahmed	 Khan’s	 self-exculpation.	 Wittingly	 or	 not	 he	 had	 been
trying	 to	 transfer	 some	 of	 the	 burden	 of	 responsibility	 for	 what	 had	 happened	 on	 to	 the	 loyal	 and
badly	wounded	Ahmed	Khan.	But	that	was	unfair.	He	was	the	emperor,	the	sole	commander,	the	final
arbiter	in	decisions.	He	had	been	tormenting	himself	as	he	lay	on	his	bed,	kept	awake	by	the	pain	and
itching	of	his	wound,	as	to	how	he	had	let	this	defeat	happen.	Had	he	been	too	trusting,	too	ready	to
hear	 what	 he	 wanted	 to	 hear	 without,	 as	 Khanzada	 always	 urged,	 seeking	 the	 motive?	 He	 had	 been
complacent,	that	he	knew,	but	had	his	military	strategy	also	been	flawed?	However,	he	must	not	brood
too	much	on	the	past	but	rather	put	the	defeat	behind	him	and	make	sure	it	did	not	happen	again.	Of
one	thing	he	was	certain.	His	resolve	to	rule	had	grown	in	the	face	of	setbacks.
‘I	did	not	mean	to	criticise,	Ahmed	Khan,	but	make	sure	we	keep	as	many	scouts	out	as	possible	on
both	 sides	 of	 the	 river.	 Have	 we	 heard	 from	 the	 troops	 accompanying	 my	 aunt	 and	 the	 other	 royal

women?’
‘At	 least	 good	 news	 from	 them.	 They	 are	 making	 excellent	 progress	 despite	 the	 monsoon	 and
expect	to	reach	Agra	in	seven	or	eight	weeks.’
‘Good.’	Turning	to	Baba	Yasaval,	Humayun	asked,	‘What	were	our	losses?’
‘Grievous,	Majesty.	Over	fifty	thousand	men	are	dead	or	severely	wounded,	or	have	deserted,	and
we’ve	lost	at	least	that	number	of	horses,	elephants	and	baggage	animals.	We	were	able	to	bring	off
only	a	few	of	the	cannon	and	those	were	mainly	small	ones.	We	lost	a	good	part	of	the	war	chest	as
well	as	other	equipment	too.’
‘I	feared	as	much.We	need	time	to	re-equip	and	to	recruit.	We	must	send	ambassadors	to	reassure
our	allies	before	any	unwise	seeds	of	rebellion	or	defection	germinate	in	their	minds.	Like	Sher	Shah,
we’re	in	no	position	to	renew	the	conflict	immediately.	Instead,	we	should	continue	our	march	back
along	the	Ganges.	There	is	no	shame	in	such	a	retreat	if	it	is	a	prelude	to	victory,	as	we	must	ensure	it
is.’

Although	the	rain	had	ceased	and	the	sun	was	now	shining	brightly,	producing	rainbow	effects	in	the
bubbling	fountains,	the	courtyard	before	Humayun’s	durbar	hall,	his	audience	hall,	in	the	Agra	fort
was	 still	 wet	 and	 glistening.	 It	 was	 four	 months	 since	 the	 ill-fated	 battle	 at	 Chausa.	 Humayun	 had
stationed	 his	 main	 army	 one	 hundred	 and	 twenty	 miles	 south	 of	 Agra	 to	 block	 any	 unexpected
advance	by	Sher	Shah	while	he	himself	had	returned	to	his	capital	to	rally	more	allies.
More	bad	news	had	greeted	him	on	his	arrival	in	Agra.	Bahadur	Shah	the	Sultan	of	Gujarat	and	his
allies	the	Lodi	pretenders	had	taken	advantage	of	his	preoccupation	with	Sher	Shah	in	Bengal	to	reemerge	from	their	hiding	places	in	the	highlands	and	drive	out	Humayun’s	governors	and	their	few
men	from	Gujarat’s	strongholds.	Recognising	that	he	could	not	fight	a	war	on	two	fronts,	Humayun
had	 sent	 Kasim,	 his	 vizier	 and	 veteran	 of	 so	 many	 perilous	 ambassadorial	 missions	 for	 his	 father
Babur,	to	Gujarat	to	negotiate	a	peace	deal.	Humayun	would	return	autonomy	to	Gujarat	provided	the
sultan	nominally	at	least	recognised	him	as	his	overlord.
A	 week	 ago,	 a	 tired,	 dusty	 but	 smiling	 Kasim	 had	 dismounted	 from	 his	 horse	 and	 told	 Humayun
that	 the	 sultan	 had	 agreed	 to	 his	 proposals.	 And	 there	 had	 been	 other	 encouraging	 developments,
Humayun	reflected	as	he	moved	across	the	courtyard	towards	the	durbar	hall	where	his	courtiers	and
commanders	 were	 waiting.	 His	 half-brothers	 had	 sent	 small	 contingents	 of	 troops	 from	 their
provinces,	together	with	promises	of	much	larger	contributions.	There	was	no	sign	–	as	yet	at	least	–
of	Kamran	and	his	other	half-brothers	using	his	misfortunes	to	attempt	a	rising	against	him,	rather
Sher	Shah’s	revolt	seemed	to	have	brought	them	together.All	would	yet	be	well,	Humayun	comforted
himself,	and	a	half-smile	crossed	his	face.
‘Get	back.	Do	not	dare	approach	His	Majesty.’
Humayun	turned	to	look	behind	him	where	the	shout	had	come	from.	A	tall,	black-turbaned	guard
was	gripping	a	small,	struggling	figure	firmly	by	the	wrists.
‘He	told	me	to	come	–	that	I	could	sit	on	his	throne	for	an	hour	or	two.’
‘Have	 you	 been	 touched	 by	 the	 sun?	 Don’t	 be	 disrespectful	 –	 you’ll	 get	 yourself	 flogged	 at	 best,
crushed	beneath	the	elephant’s	foot	at	worst.’
Humayun	looked	closer	at	the	wriggling	figure	with	the	determined	voice.	It	was	Nizam,	the	water-

carrier	who	had	saved	his	life.
‘Release	him.’	The	guard	did	so	and	Nizam	dropped	to	his	knees	before	Humayun,	head	bowed.
‘You	may	stand,	Nizam.	I	remember	well	how	you	helped	me	 from	 the	 battlefield	 of	 Chausa	 and
across	the	Ganges.	I	also	remember	how	you	asked	for	no	reward	and	–	to	show	my	gratitude	–	I	did
say	 that	 for	 a	 short	 while	 you	 could	 sit	 on	 my	 throne	 and	 that	 any	 command	 you	 gave	 would	 be
carried	 out.’	 Humayun’s	 guards	 and	 the	 courtiers	 including	 Kasim	 and	 Baisanghar	 who	 had	 been
escorting	 him	 to	 the	 durbar	 hall	 were	 exchanging	 surprised	 glances	 but	 he	 ignored	 them.	 ‘Fetch	 a
fitting	robe	for	our	temporary	emperor,’	he	ordered	Jauhar,	who	returned	a	few	minutes	later	with	a
red	velvet	robe	and	a	gold-tasselled	sash	of	the	same	material.
Nizam	 himself	 was	 gazing	 round	 the	 flower-filled	 courtyard	 and	 fountains	 bubbling	 with
rosewater.	His	self-confidence	seemed	to	have	deserted	him	and	as	Jauhar	approached	him	with	the
robe	he	recoiled.
‘Courage,	Nizam.’	Humayun	patted	the	youth’s	shoulder.	‘To	have	your	dearest	wish	fulfilled	isn’t
always	 easy.’	 He	 took	 the	 robe	 from	 Jauhar	 and	 himself	 helped	 Nizam	 into	 it,	 fastening	 the	 silver
clasps	at	waist	and	right	shoulder	and	tying	the	sash	around	Nizam’s	slight	frame.	There	should	have
been	something	comical	about	the	sight	of	the	shock-headed	young	water-carrier	in	the	velvet	robe,
but	Nizam	drew	himself	up	and	the	carriage	of	his	head	had	a	dignity.
‘Let	us	proceed.’	Humayun	nodded	to	the	two	drummers	stationed	outside	the	durbar	hall,	who	at
once	began	to	strike	with	the	flats	of	their	hands	the	tall	ox-hide	drums	resting	on	their	lapis	lazuli
inlaid	golden	stands,	announcing	the	coming	of	the	emperor.
‘Come	Nizam,	let	us	go	together	–	you	the	emperor	of	the	hour,	I	the	emperor	born	to	carry	the
burden	of	leadership	to	the	grave.’
Humayun	 and	 Nizam	 led	 the	 procession	 into	 the	 durbar	 hall	 where	 Humayun’s	 courtiers	 and
commanders	 were	 waiting.	 As	 they	 approached	 the	 throne,	 Humayun	 stopped	 and	 pushed	 Nizam
gently	forward.	To	a	huge	gasp	of	surprise,	Nizam	slowly	mounted	the	throne	and,	turning,	sat	down.
Humayun	raised	his	hands	for	silence.‘I	acknowledge	before	all	my	court	the	bravery	and	loyalty
of	 this	 youth,	 Nizam	 the	 water-carrier,	 in	 saving	 my	 life	 after	 Chausa.	 I	 promised	 Nizam	 that	 for	 a
short	while	he	should	sit	on	my	throne	and	make	whatever	pronouncements	he	wished.	He	has	already
shown	himself	honourable	and	will	not,	I	know,	abuse	the	power	that	I	have	put	into	his	hands.	Nizam
–	what	are	your	wishes?’
Humayun	was	intrigued.	What	would	Nizam	ask	for?	Money,	jewels,	land?	He	must	know	that	his
life	–	and	that	of	his	family	–	need	never	be	the	same	again.	It	felt	good	to	be	able	to	grant	Nizam’s
wishes.
‘Majesty	.	.	.’	Nizam’s	voice	from	high	up	on	the	throne	sounded	reedy	and	thin.	As	if	he’d	realised
it,	 he	 tried	 again.	 ‘Majesty.’	 This	 time	 his	 young	 voice	 rang	 out,	 true	 and	 clear.	 ‘I	 have	 just	 two
commands.	That	I	receive	a	grant	of	a	small	parcel	of	land	near	the	Ganges	where	I	can	grow	crops
and	that	the	tax	on	all	water-sellers	be	rescinded	for	a	year.’
Humayun	heard	some	open	sniggers.	Even	Kasim’s	usually	serious,	ascetic	face	seemed	in	danger
of	twitching	into	a	smile,	but	Humayun	himself	was	touched	by	Nizam’s	modest	requests.	He	was	not
seeking	to	enrich	himself	excessively	like	so	many	at	court.
‘It	shall	be	as	you	command.’
‘Then	 I	 am	 ready	 to	 descend	 the	 throne.’	 Nizam	 got	 up	 and,	 relief	 etched	 on	 his	 small	 features,
stepped	lightly	down,	holding	his	robes	clear	of	his	feet	to	avoid	tripping.	Looking	at	him	Humayun
realised	 he	 had	 witnessed	 real	 courage.	 What	 must	 it	 have	 cost	 Nizam	 to	 come	 to	 court	 to	 ask
Humayun	to	honour	his	promise?	For	all	he	knew,	Humayun	might	have	forgotten	all	about	him	or

been	 angered	 by	 his	 presumptuousness.	 Just	 as	 the	 guard	 had	 yelled	 at	 the	 struggling	 boy	 he	 might
well	have	paid	the	price	of	a	flogging	or	even	death	for	his	temerity	in	calling	an	emperor	to	account.
Humayun	 now	 mounted	 the	 throne.	 ‘As	 emperor	 again	 I	 too	 have	 orders	 to	 give.	 These	 are	 that
Nizam	the	water-carrier	also	be	given	five	hundred	gold	coins	and	that	the	grant	of	land	should	be
sufficient	to	support	him	and	all	his	family	in	comfort.’	Humayun	watched	as	the	small	figure,	with
one	backward	glance	at	him,	was	escorted	from	the	durbar	hall.
Later	that	day,	with	all	business	done	and	the	pale	moon	just	beginning	to	rise	and	the	first	cooking
fires	alight,	Humayun	climbed	to	the	battlements	of	the	Agra	fort.	He	had	dismissed	his	guards	and
wished	to	be	alone	with	his	thoughts	for	a	while.	His	love	of	solitude	which	to	Babur	had	seemed	such
a	vice	in	a	ruler	had	never	entirely	deserted	him.	Neither	had	his	fascination	with	the	machinations	of
the	stars.	Though	he	curbed	such	feelings,	as	he	knew	he	must,	they	were	still	there	–	far	stronger	than
any	longing	for	Gulrukh’s	concoction	of	wine	and	opium.
His	 father	 had	 once	 spoken	 to	 him	 of	 the	 tyranny	 of	 kingship	 –	 and	 he	 had	 been	 right.	 In	 some
ways,	was	being	a	ruler	any	better	than	being	a	poor	man?	At	least	Nizam,	dipping	his	water	bottles
into	the	Ganges,	was	his	own	man.	It	wasn’t	easy	to	bear	the	burden	of	the	future	of	a	dynasty,	yet	he
knew	he	would	never	wish	to	abandon	such	a	sacred	charge.
Night	had	fallen	around	him	while	he	mused.	It	was	time	to	return	to	his	apartments	where	Jauhar
and	his	attendants	would	be	spreading	the	evening	meal	–	the	plates	of	lamb,	buttered	rice	and	root
vegetables	 of	 the	 Moghuls’	 homelands	 and	 the	 spicy	 dishes	 of	 Hindustan	 with	 their	 saffron	 and
turmeric,	intense	as	the	sun	which	burned	by	day	above	the	plains	of	his	new	empire.	By	the	light	of	a
blazing	torch	mounted	on	the	wall,	Humayun	made	for	the	three	flights	of	steep	stone	steps	that	led
back	 towards	 his	 apartments.	 Still	 lost	 in	 his	 thoughts	 he	 descended	 the	 first	 flight,	 then,	 about	 to
round	the	corner	to	descend	the	second,	he	paused	at	the	sound	of	voices.
‘I	thought	the	emperor	had	cured	himself	of	his	madness.	We	put	up	with	months	of	his	lunacy	.	.	.
all	 that	 rubbish	 about	 days	 of	 Mars	 and	 days	 of	 Jupiter	 and	 that	 stupid	 carpet	 with	 the	 planets.	 I’m
surprised	we	were	allowed	to	piss	when	we	wanted	.	.	.’
‘That	 smelly	 little	 peasant	 should	 never	 have	 got	 near	 the	 durbar	 hall,	 let	 alone	 have	 sat	 on	 the
imperial	throne,’	said	another	voice	after	a	pause.	‘If	the	emperor	had	wanted	to	reward	him,	a	copper
coin	and	a	goodbye	kick	would’ve	done.	I	hope	this	isn’t	the	start	of	some	fresh	insanity.	With	Sher
Shah’s	armies	pressing	nearer	we	need	a	warrior,	not	a	dreamer.’
‘The	emperor	is	a	fighter	–	no	one	is	braver	in	the	field	.	.	.’	said	a	third	man.	His	voice	was	deep
and	sounded	older	but	–	as	with	the	others	–	Humayun	didn’t	recognise	it.
‘Well	let’s	hope	he	remembers	that’s	what	he’s	there	for.	Babur	was	a	real	man	–	that’s	why	I	rode
from	Kabul	with	his	invasion	force.	I	didn’t	leave	everything	behind	for	a	fanciful	star-gazer	I	can’t
trust	.	.	.’
‘But	he’s	already	won	great	victories	.	.	.	remember	Gujarat	and	how	we	.	.	.’	the	deeper	voice	went
on,	but	as	the	men	began	to	move	off	Humayun	couldn’t	catch	the	rest.
Their	words	had	angered	him.	He’d	been	tempted	to	leap	out	and	confront	them	but	there’d	been
justice	in	some	of	what	they’d	said.	Doped	with	opium	and	living	in	a	twilight	world	he	had	lost	touch
with	his	commanders	and	courtiers	and	let	his	people	down.	But	they	were	wrong	about	Nizam.	He
had	given	Nizam	his	word	and	had	kept	it.	That	was	the	action	of	an	honourable	man.	To	do	otherwise
would	have	damned	him	in	the	next	life,	if	not	in	this	.	.	.

‘First,	what	do	we	know	of	our	enemy,	Ahmed	Khan?’
Humayun	was	seated	once	more	in	his	scarlet	command	tent	with	his	military	council	around	him.
He	had	arrived	at	his	army’s	camp,	a	hundred	and	twenty	miles	south	of	Agra,	the	previous	evening	to
renew	the	war	against	Sher	Shah.
‘The	news,	Majesty,	is	not	good.	After	burying	his	dead,	Sher	Shah	returned	slowly	to	Kakori,	the
town	 he	 had	 used	 as	 his	 forward	 command	 centre.	 Here,	 ten	 weeks	 ago,	 he	 held	 a	 great	 parade	 to
celebrate	his	victory.	To	the	beating	of	drums	a	detachment	of	his	elite	cavalry	riding	beneath	their
purple	pennants	led	the	way.	They	waved	to	the	crowd	who	cheered	them	at	the	tops	of	their	voices.
Sher	Shah	had	succeeded	in	getting	most	of	the	bronze	cannon	he	captured	from	us	out	of	the	Ganges
mud	and	back	into	working	order.	These	came	next	in	the	parade,	pulled	through	the	streets	by	some
of	 our	 elephants	 which	 he’d	 rounded	 up.They	 were	 followed	 by	 ranks	 of	 our	 prisoners,	 forced	 to
march	in	chains.	According	to	one	of	our	spies	who	got	close	disguised	as	a	sweetmeat-seller,	some
were	limping	or	had	their	wounds	bandaged	with	dirty	cloths.	Others	had	raw,	weeping	sores	where
the	chains	bit	into	their	flesh.	All	were	gaunt	and	hungry-looking	and	held	their	eyes	on	the	floor.	The
spy	said	the	crowd	yelled	obscenities	at	them,	jostled	and	pelted	them	with	rotting	rubbish	and	even
lashed	out	at	them	with	sticks.
‘They	in	turn	were	followed	by	further	detachments	of	Sher	Shah’s	rejoicing	troops	and	at	last	by
Sher	Shah	himself	riding	high	in	a	gilded	howdah	atop	a	tall	elephant	which	had	its	tusks	painted	with
gold	leaf	and	its	large	saddle	cloth,	which	reached	down	to	the	ground,	embroidered	with	pearls	and
jewels.	 When	 the	 procession	 reached	 the	 main	 square	 of	 the	 city,	 Sher	 Shah	 dismounted	 to	 take	 his
place	on	a	great	dais	covered	in	purple	cloth.
‘Here	 he	 distributed	 further	 gifts	 of	 our	 captured	 treasure	 to	 his	 chief	 supporters	 and	 granted
assignments	of	our	captured	lands	to	them,	and	even	gave	them	groups	of	our	wretched	prisoners	to
serve	as	slaves	in	their	fields	and	quarries.	Then,	further	shame	to	say,	many	of	our	former	allies	and
vassal	rulers	came	forward	dressed	in	their	ceremonial	finery.	They	happily	prostrated	themselves	in
the	dirt	before	Sher	Shah	to	be	pardoned	and	rewarded	with	positions	in	his	army	and	promises	of
further	bounty	when	you	were	defeated.	They	were	followed	by	ambassadors	from	the	rulers	of	the
Deccan	 states	 such	 as	 diamond-rich	 Golconda	 who,	 seeing	 the	 opportunity	 to	 enrich	 themselves
further	 from	 our	 weakness,	 promised	 aid	 to	 Sher	 Shah	 and	 were	 in	 turn	 gratified	 by	 grandiose
assurances	about	portions	of	our	land	to	be	ceded	to	them.
‘Finally,	to	another	loud	blaring	of	trumpets,	one	of	the	most	important	of	your	former	vassals	–
the	Raja	of	Golpur	–	came	forward	and	joined	by	many	of	Sher	Shah’s	commanders	fell	to	his	knees
before	Sher	Shah.	Together	they	begged	him	to	accept	the	title	of	emperor	–	padishah	–	obsequiously
and	 traitorously	 assuring	 him	 he	 was	 much	 better	 suited	 to	 hold	 it	 than	 ever	 you	 were.	 Twice	 Sher
Shah	 refused	 with	 self-deprecating	 statements	 that	 all	 he	 sought	 was	 to	 help	 those	 suffering	 your
oppression.	 He	 sought	 neither	 power	 nor	 reward	 for	 himself.	 However	 on	 the	 third	 occasion,
beseeched	 in	 ever	 more	 flattering	 and	 vainglorious	 terms	 –	 the	 hyperbole	 of	 their	 words	 knew	 no
limits	–	he	accepted,	saying,	“If	it	is	your	settled	wish,	I	can	but	agree.	I	promise	to	rule	wisely	and
give	justice	to	all.”	Then	a	crown	of	gold	set	with	rubies	–	held	ready	all	the	time;	the	whole	thing	was
stage-managed,	his	initial	refusals	merely	for	show	–	was	placed	on	his	head	by	the	Raja	of	Golpur
and	 three	 of	 Sher	 Shah’s	 officers.	 All	 present	 prostrated	 themselves	 before	 him,	 traitorous	 noses

pressed	to	the	earth.
‘Later	that	night,	Sher	Shah	staged	a	grand	pageant.	By	the	flaring	light	of	torches	young	warriors
from	each	of	the	states	and	clans	now	allied	to	him	performed	martial	exercises	before	Sher	Shah	as
he	 sat	 beneath	 a	 canopy	 of	 gold	 cloth	 on	 a	 tall,	 straight-backed	 gilded	 throne.	 A	 snarling	 tiger	 was
carved	into	it,	just	above	where	Sher	Shah’s	head	came.	It	had	two	large	rubies	for	eyes	which	–	I	am
told	–	glowed	fiercely	in	the	dark.Then	after	the	performance	was	completed	each	in	turn	bowed	low
before	 the	 so-called	 emperor	 and	 he	 sprinkled	 their	 perspiring	 shaved	 heads	 with	 saffron,	 ground
pearls,	musk	and	ambergris	as	betokening	the	riches	and	sweet	success	he	would	make	adhere	to	them
and	to	the	factions	they	represented.
‘The	 following	 day	 being	 a	 Friday,	 in	 the	 city’s	 main	 mosque	 –	 crowded	 to	 bursting	 point	 with
Sher	Shah’s	commanders	–	the	mullah	too	proclaimed	Sher	Shah	emperor	by	reading	the	sermon	–
the	khutba	 –	 in	 his	 name	 and	 traitorously	 and	 blasphemingly	 assigning	 to	 Sher	 Shah	 all	 your	 lands
whether	 already	 occupied	 by	 him,	 as	 in	 Bengal,	 or	 far	 beyond	 his	 reach	 in	 Afghanistan	 and	 the
Punjab.The	next	day,	Sher	Shah	marched	out	to	renew	his	advance	upon	us.	With	his	new	allies,	his
armies	now	number	near	two	hundred	thousand.’
‘Where	is	he	now?’
‘About	a	hundred	miles	away,	advancing	slowly	towards	Agra.’
‘And	Baba	Yasaval,	what	of	our	own	armies?	Has	the	re-equipment	progressed	well?’
‘Yes,	the	armourers	have	done	good	work.	Our	men	have	new	weapons.	The	foundries	have	blazed
red	fire	day	and	night	to	produce	more	cannon.	The	horse	brokers	have	supplied	us	with	sufficient
animals	to	re-mount	our	cavalry	–	even	if	some	are	not	as	big	and	strong	as	those	bred	on	the	steppes
of	our	ancestral	homelands.’
‘And	 how	 about	 the	 promises	 of	 further	 detachments	 of	 troops	 by	 our	 allies	 and	 by	 my	 halfbrothers	too?’
‘Here	the	news	is	less	good.	Several	of	our	allies	have	procrastinated,	citing	the	monsoon	or	local
rebellions	 as	 reasons	 for	 delay	 in	 despatching	 troops	 or	 for	 only	 sending	 small	 detachments.	 Your
younger	half-brothers	Hindal	and	Askari	have,	however,	fulfilled	and	in	the	case	of	Hindal	exceeded
their	promises,	but	your	eldest	half-brother	Kamran	has	sent	from	the	Punjab	only	a	small	detachment
of	two	hundred	and	fifty	cavalry,	albeit	mounted	on	fine	horses.	In	response	to	our	promptings	for
further	assistance	he	will	give	no	clear	timescale	and	hints	he	must	hold	some	troops	back	in	case	you
suffer	further	reverses.’
‘But	that	is	the	certain	way	to	ensure	that	we	do	suffer	further	defeats,’	Humayun	snapped	but	then
stopped	himself	from	saying	more.	It	would	do	no	good	to	criticise	his	half-brother	publicly.Yet	his
commander ’s	words	chimed	with	his	own	private	correspondence	with	Kamran.	His	half-brother	had
delayed	responding	to	messages	and	–	when	he	did	reply	–	although	suitably	bellicose	in	his	hostility
to	 Sher	 Shah,	 he	 was	 noncommittal	 about	 despatching	 troops	 to	 serve	 under	 Humayun’s	 command.
Instead,	 Kamran	 had	 offered	 to	 lead	 all	 his	 men	 to	 join	 the	 fight	 himself.	 He	 must	 have	 known	 that
Humayun	had	to	refuse,	since	to	accept	would	be	to	leave	the	Punjab	without	a	governor	and	without
troops	 to	 keep	 order.	 Kamran	 seemed	 to	 be	 playing	 a	 waiting	 game,	 more	 anxious	 to	 preserve	 his
personal	 position	 than	 to	 recover	 the	 lost	 provinces	 of	 their	 father ’s	 empire	 if	 it	 meant	 adding	 to
Humayun’s	glory	rather	than	his	own.
‘I	will	write	to	my	half-brother.	But	how	many	men	can	our	commanders	deploy	now?’
‘A	hundred	and	seventy	thousand,	Majesty.’
‘So	for	the	present	Sher	Shah’s	forces	outnumber	us?’
‘Yes,	Majesty.	Until	reinforcements	arrive	from	your	brother	Kamran	and	others.’

Humayun	felt	a	soft,	warm	evening	breeze	on	his	cheek	as,	not	far	from	the	settlement	of	Kanauj	on
the	Ganges,	he	looked	from	his	command	position	on	a	sandstone	ridge	dotted	with	scrubby	bushes
and	the	occasional	stunted	tree	towards	the	opposite	ridge	where,	if	his	scouts’	reports	were	correct,
Sher	 Shah’s	 army	 would	 emerge	 the	 next	 morning.	 Briefly,	 the	 breeze	 reminded	 Humayun	 of	 the
gentle	 winds	 of	 summer	 in	 his	 birthplace,	 Afghanistan.	 At	 the	 recollection	 a	 half-smile	 crossed	 his
face	 only	 to	 be	 driven	 away	 by	 the	 ever-present	 knowledge	 that	 the	 two	 months	 since	 his	 military
council	had	brought	nothing	but	bad	news.
Sher	Shah’s	advance	had	continued,	slow	but	relentless.	That	was	perhaps	only	to	be	expected	but
what	Humayun	had	not	anticipated	was	the	defection	to	Sher	Shah	of	Hanif	Khan,	Raja	of	Moradabad,
one	 of	 Humayun’s	 most	 senior	 cavalry	 commanders	 now	 Suleiman	 Mirza	 was	 dead,	 together	 with
fifteen	thousand	of	his	men,	all	drawn	from	Hanif	Khan’s	feudal	lands	to	the	east	of	Delhi.	Just	after
his	desertion,	Sher	Shah	–	in	an	obviously	prearranged	move	–	had	attacked	a	fortified	town	on	the
Ganges	which	had	previously	been	under	the	command	of	Hanif	Khan.	Demoralised	by	Hanif	Khan’s
desertion,	the	few	thousand	of	Humayun’s	troops	who	had	remained	loyal	had	put	up	little	resistance
and	 the	 town	 had	 soon	 surrendered,	 clearing	 the	 way	 for	 Sher	 Shah’s	 advance.	 Humayun	 could
scarcely	 blame	 these	 troops.	 Instead	 he	 reproached	 himself	 that	 he	 had	 devoted	 insufficient	 time	 to
understanding	the	characters	and	ambitions	of	those	around	him	–	a	mistake	he	would	avoid	in	future.
Equally	troubling	to	Humayun	had	been	reports	of	what	was	happening	to	his	rear.	There	had	been
a	rising	in	favour	of	Sher	Shah	in	Hindal’s	province	of	Alwar	which,	Hindal	wrote,	he’d	only	been
able	to	put	down	with	difficulty.	Other	rebellions	had	broken	out	among	Hanif	Khan’s	vassals	in	the
mountains	near	Delhi	and	Humayun	had	had	to	detach	troops	to	suppress	them	who	should	have	been
training	in	preparation	for	joining	his	army.
Worst	 of	 all	 had	 been	 the	 letter	 he	 had	 received	 from	 Kamran.While	 still	 pledging	 his	 loyalty	 to
Humayun	and	the	dynasty	and	his	opposition	to	Sher	Shah,	he	had	questioned	his	brother ’s	military
strategy	in	moving	further	east	to	confront	Sher	Shah	two	hundred	miles	and	more	beyond	Agra.	He
had	proposed	instead	preparing	either	Agra	or	Delhi	for	a	siege	and	allowing	Sher	Shah	to	waste	his
strength	in	futile	attempts	to	breach	their	great	walls.	Kamran	had	used	his	‘disquiet’	as	a	pretext	for
refusing	to	send	further	troops,	insisting	that	he	had	to	hold	them	back	under	his	own	command	to
serve	as	a	second	line	of	defence	if	Humayun’s	flawed	strategy	failed,	as	Kamran	thought	it	had	every
chance	of	doing.
‘Majesty,	 Baba	 Yasaval	 is	 waiting	 to	 accompany	 you	 to	 review	 your	 troops.’	 Jauhar	 broke	 into
Humayun’s	reverie.	He	was	holding	the	reins	of	Humayun’s	tall	brown	horse.
‘Very	well.’	Humayun	turned	and	mounted	the	horse	to	join	Baba	Yasaval	a	little	further	along	the
ridge.	As	the	two	men	moved	off,	Humayun	asked,	‘What	are	our	scouts’	latest	reports?	Is	there	any
change?’
‘No,	 Majesty.	 Sher	 Shah	 has	 encamped	 about	 two	 miles	 beyond	 the	 ridge	 opposite	 and	 from	 the
sight	 and	 sound	 of	 the	 preparations	 being	 made	 in	 his	 camp	 tonight,	 it	 seems	 he	 will	 indeed	 attack
tomorrow.’
‘Has	the	work	been	completed	on	the	defensive	earth	ramparts	I	asked	to	be	constructed	halfway	up
this	ridge?’
‘Yes,	Majesty	–	you	will	see	as	we	make	our	tour	of	inspection.’
‘Good.	From	the	ramparts’	protection	we	should	be	able	to	blunt	Sher	Shah’s	attack	with	cannon

and	musket	fire	as	well	as	our	archers’	arrows	rather	than	charge	headlong	into	a	costly	hand-to-hand
engagement.’
‘But	 we’ll	 need	 to	 get	 in	 close,	 Majesty,	 if	 we	 are	 to	 vanquish	 rather	 than	 just	 avoid	 being
vanquished.’
‘Of	 course.	 Once	 we’ve	 reduced	 Sher	 Shah’s	 numerical	 advantage	 and	 his	 men	 are	 nearing
exhaustion	we’ll	sally	out	and	destroy	them.	I	want	no	half-measures	either.	It’s	just	the	timing	of	our
attack	I	want	to	control	carefully.’
By	now,	they	were	riding	along	the	red	earth	of	the	ramparts.	His	men	had	worked	well	in	the	heat
with	their	picks	and	shovels	in	the	four	days	they’d	been	encamped	here,	athwart	the	route	to	Kanauj
and	the	Ganges.	The	piles	of	earth	and	stone	were	six	feet	high	everywhere	and	in	most	places	ten.
They	stretched	all	along	the	mid	section	of	the	ridge	which	ran	roughly	north	to	south.
‘Who	am	I	to	reward	or	promote	during	this	review,	Baba	Yasaval?’
‘We	 have	 chosen	 three	 men,	 Majesty.	 A	 wounded	 Afghani	 from	 south	 of	 Kabul	 named	 Wazim
Pathan	who	fought	well	in	one	of	the	skirmishes	as	Sher	Shah	advanced.	He	saved	one	of	his	officers
at	the	cost	of	losing	his	own	right	hand	and	part	of	his	lower	arm.	We	have	a	bag	of	silver	coin	for
him	to	take	with	him	as	he	makes	the	long	journey	back	to	his	village.	The	second	is	a	junior	officer
from	Lahore	who	showed	great	bravery	in	fighting	off	an	ambush	by	Sher	Shah’s	men	on	one	of	our
equipment	convoys.	We	have	a	jewelled	sword	for	you	to	present	to	him	as	a	reward.	The	third	man
you	 know	 well	 –	 young	 Hassan	 Butt	 from	 Ghazni.	 As	 you	 requested,	 he	 is	 to	 be	 given	 a	 greater
position	in	the	cavalry.’
The	troops	chosen	for	Humayun	to	review	were	drawn	up	a	little	distance	from	the	ramparts	near
where	oxen	and	elephants	had	laboured	to	get	his	cannon	into	position.	Humayun	rode	up	and	down
the	 ranks	 of	 cavalry,	 some	 of	 whose	 horses,	 restless	 from	 standing	 in	 the	 heat,	 were	 tossing	 their
heads	or	pawing	the	ground,	and	then	on	past	the	straighter	lines	of	foot	archers,	infantry	and	gunners
to	 a	 position	 in	 the	 centre	 where	 a	 dais	 had	 been	 erected.	 Those	 to	 be	 rewarded	 or	 promoted	 were
called	 forward.	 A	 tear	 formed	 in	 the	 eye	 of	 the	 wounded	 Wazim	 Pathan,	 who	 was	 grey-haired	 and
looked	 much	 older	 than	 many	 of	 Humayun’s	 troops.	 As	 he	 took	 the	 red	 velvet	 bag	 of	 coin	 in	 his
remaining	hand,	he	stammered,	‘Padishah,	thank	you.	I	will	be	able	to	hold	my	head	up	high	in	my
village	and	be	able	to	pay	dowries	for	my	daughters.’
‘You	deserve	all	the	respect	you	obtain,’	said	Humayun.	The	officer	from	Lahore	smiled	with	pride
as	 Humayun	 handed	 him	 the	 sword.	 So	 too	 did	 young	 Hassan	 Butt,	 as	 usual	 wearing	 his	 pale	 blue
turban,	when	before	the	whole	army	Humayun	announced	his	appointment	to	command	an	elite	band
of	cavalry.
While	 all	 three	 men	 returned	 to	 the	 ranks,	 Humayun	 spoke	 to	 the	 troops	 assembled	 before	 him.
‘Tomorrow	we	expect	to	fight	Sher	Shah	and	his	men.	Even	though	his	armies	are	strong,	his	cause	is
weak.	The	throne	of	Hindustan	is	mine	by	right	as	the	son	of	Babur	and	the	descendant	of	Timur.	Sher
Shah	is	the	son	of	a	horse	dealer	and	the	descendant	of	nameless	bastards.	Let	us	fight	so	well	that	by
tomorrow	evening	he	will	lie	in	a	traitor ’s	grave	and	even	then	occupy	more	of	this	land	than	he	is
entitled	to.	Never	forget	the	justice	of	our	cause.	Remember	that	all	I	ask	is	that	you	fight	as	bravely	as
the	men	I	have	just	rewarded.	I	swear	to	you	I	will	attempt	to	outdo	them	myself.’

Chapter	8
Blood	and	Dust
Taking	 no	 chances	 that	 Sher	 Shah	 would	 again	 surprise	 him	 by	 a	 night-time	 attack	 as	 he	 had	 at
Chausa,	Humayun	had	had	his	men	awake	and	standing	to,	ready	for	action,	three	hours	before	dawn.
But	no	attack	had	come	and	breakfast	was	now	long	over	and	the	cooking	fires	doused.The	morning
was	clear	and	even	at	around	nine	o’clock	the	heat	was	building	up	as	Humayun,	dressed	for	battle,
paced	once	more	along	the	ridge.	His	scouts	had	reported	that	Sher	Shah	had	started	to	advance	about
an	hour	ago	and	should	soon	approach	the	ridge	opposite.
They	were	right.	Only	a	few	minutes	later	Humayun	made	out	the	first	purple	pennants	topping	the
ridge.	 Then	 he	 saw	 one	 mail-clad	 rider,	 then	 another,	 then	 hundreds.	 Sher	 Shah’s	 vanguard	 of	 elite
cavalry	 was	 deploying	 in	 the	 position	 Humayun	 had	 anticipated	 under	 the	 orders	 of	 a	 tall	 figure
whose	breastplate	and	helmet	glinted	in	the	morning	sun.	It	was	too	far	off	to	distinguish	who	it	was
but	 Humayun	 assumed	 –	 hoped,	 even	 –	 that	 it	 was	 Sher	 Shah.	 He	 wanted	 to	 take	 Sher	 Shah	 on	 in
personal	combat	once	more	to	prove	he	was	the	better	fighter	and	to	see	his	enemy	bleed	into	the	dust.
But	 he	 knew	 that	 like	 his	 men	 he	 must	 fight	 the	 temptation	 to	 risk	 all	 on	 one	 sudden	 desperate
onslaught.
A	quarter	of	an	hour	later,	Humayun	saw	the	tall	figure	wave	his	sword	to	put	the	first	ranks	of	his
horsemen	 into	 motion.	 To	 Humayun	 there	 seemed	 about	 five	 thousand	 of	 them	 as	 they	 came
galloping	 down	 from	 the	 ridge,	 yelling	 and	 shouting	 with	 their	 purple	 banners	 streaming	 behind
them.	They	appeared,	as	Humayun	expected,	to	be	going	to	assault	head-on	his	makeshift	ramparts,
constructed	halfway	up	the	ridge	on	which	he	stood.
Already	Baba	Yasaval	had	given	orders	for	Humayun’s	artillery	to	open	fire	and	the	first	of	Sher
Shah’s	 horsemen	 were	 crumpling	 under	 the	 impact	 of	 shot.Through	 the	 white	 cannon	 smoke	 now
swirling	around	the	valley	below,	Humayun	watched	others	fall	from	their	horses,	struck	by	arrows
or	musket	balls.	Among	them	was	one	of	the	banner-carriers	who,	as	he	fell,	lost	his	grip	on	the	staff.
His	purple	banner	was	blown	into	the	path	of	another	rider,	becoming	entangled	with	his	horse’s	legs
and	 bringing	 animal	 and	 man	 to	 the	 ground.	 A	 moment	 or	 two	 later,	 Humayun	 saw	 to	 his	 intense
surprise	that	rather	than	charging	full	tilt	straight	at	his	positions,	the	horsemen	were	dividing.	Some
were	riding	for	one	end	of	his	line	of	earth	ramparts	and	the	others	for	the	opposite	end.	They	were
attempting	 an	 encircling	 movement,	 seemingly	 prepared	 to	 take	 the	 inevitable	 casualties	 from
Humayun’s	gunners	and	archers	as	they	swerved	across	his	front	line.
Moments	 later,	 Humayun	 saw	 from	 the	 corner	 of	 his	 eye	 another	 large	 force	 of	 Sher	 Shah’s
cavalry	appear,	galloping	over	the	low	saddle	joining	the	two	ridges	at	their	northern	end	and	clearly
preparing	to	attack	his	less	well-defended	flanks.
‘Jauhar,	send	a	messenger	to	tell	Baba	Yasaval	to	divert	some	squadrons	of	cavalry	to	repulse	the
attack	over	the	saddle	from	the	north.	I	will	gallop	across	to	lead	them	myself.’	Without	waiting	for
confirmation	 from	 Jauhar	 that	 he	 had	 heard,	 Humayun	 waved	 his	 leather-gauntleted	 hand	 to	 his
bodyguard	to	follow	and	kicked	his	brown	horse	to	a	gallop	along	the	crest	of	the	ridge.	After	a	few

hundred	yards	the	ground	began	to	fall	away	towards	the	saddle	and	Humayun	could	see	that	some	of
Sher	Shah’s	cavalry	had	already	succeeded	in	getting	behind	the	northern	extremity	of	his	ramparts.
His	musketeers	and	archers	were	firing	back	at	them	from	the	cover	of	rocks.	Then,	as	he	watched,
one	 group	 of	 archers	 turned	 and,	 dropping	 their	 bows,	 ran	 towards	 the	 rear,	 only	 for	 Sher	 Shah’s
cavalry	to	catch	up	with	them.	Slashing	from	their	saddles	they	struck	at	the	archers’	backs,	sending
most	of	them	sprawling	to	the	ground.
If	only	foot	soldiers	would	learn	that	it	was	impossible	to	run	from	cavalry,	thought	Humayun.	It
was	 not	 only	 more	 honourable	 but	 safer	 to	 stay	 behind	 cover	 and	 make	 a	 fight	 of	 it.	 Hearing	 the
sound	of	horses’	hooves	behind	him,	he	turned	in	the	saddle	to	see	the	detachment	of	horsemen	he	had
requested	from	Baba	Yasaval.	They	were	on	a	converging	path	with	his	own	and	within	a	minute	and
scarcely	 reducing	 their	 speed	 they	 had	 joined	 up	 with	 Humayun’s	 bodyguard	 and	 they	 were	 all
galloping	as	one	unit.
‘Charge!	We	must	throw	the	enemy	back	before	he	can	bring	up	his	own	infantry	to	consolidate	his
position	on	our	flanks.	Aim	to	separate	the	attackers	into	small	groups.They’ll	be	easier	to	surround
and	kill	that	way.’
As	Humayun’s	men	galloped	down	the	slope	towards	the	fighting,	a	band	of	mounted	archers	rode
out	from	Sher	Shah’s	cavalry.They	fired	a	volley	of	arrows	towards	Humayun’s	riders	before	quickly
wheeling	to	return	to	the	protection	of	their	companions.The	arrows	hissed	through	the	morning	air
and	 some	 of	 Humayun’s	 cavalry	 slackened	 their	 pace	 to	 lift	 their	 shields	 to	 protect	 themselves.
Several	 horses	 fell,	 shedding	 their	 riders	 and	 in	 turn	 bringing	 down	 others,	 further	 disrupting	 the
impetus	 of	 the	 charge.	 However,	 Humayun	 urged	 his	 men	 on,	 yelling	 to	 those	 around	 him,	 ‘Ignore
these	pinpricks,	we’ll	be	among	them	before	they	can	fire	again.’	Then	from	his	left	he	heard	another
noise	–	the	crackle	of	musket	fire	from	behind	a	jumble	of	rocks	and	boulders.	Sher	Shah	must	have
had	some	of	his	musketeers	ride	with	the	cavalry.
Hassan	 Butt,	 the	 young	 commander	 Humayun	 had	 promoted	 the	 previous	 day,	 was	 among	 the
foremost	in	the	charge,	easily	distinguished	by	his	pale	blue	turban	and	the	white	horse	he	was	riding.
Hit	in	the	head	by	a	musket	ball,	the	horse	fell	instantly	and	Hassan	Butt	crashed	from	the	saddle,	arms
flailing,	and	rolled	over	several	times	on	the	stony	ground.	Almost	incredibly	he	then	struggled	to	his
feet.	The	last	Humayun	saw	of	him	before	the	main	force	of	his	charging	cavalry	engulfed	him,	he
was	waving	his	sword	encouraging	his	fellows	onward.
Humayun	 had	 no	 time	 to	 think	 more	 about	 his	 bravery	 since	 he	 was	 himself	 now	 among	 Sher
Shah’s	horsemen.	Swerving	to	avoid	the	swinging	flail	of	one	warrior	on	a	black	horse,	he	made	for
a	tall	man	who	was	mounted	on	a	ginger	horse	and	wearing	a	steel	breastplate	–	surely	an	important
officer.	 Two	 of	 the	 riders	 around	 the	 man	 instantly	 turned	 their	 horses	 towards	 Humayun	 who,
ducking	low,	avoided	their	sword	strokes	and	struck	one	of	them	–	a	small,	bearded	man	with	a	pockmarked	face	–	a	glancing	blow	to	the	shoulder	which	made	him	drop	his	weapon.
Quickly	 Humayun	 urged	 his	 horse	 alongside	 the	 officer.	 The	 man	 cut	 at	 Humayun	 with	 his	 long
curved	sword	but	at	close	quarters	was	unable	to	put	sufficient	force	into	his	swing	for	the	sword	to
penetrate	Humayun’s	breastplate.	Nevertheless,	the	strength	of	the	stroke	knocked	Humayun	sideways
and	his	horse	carried	him	away.	Quickly	regaining	his	balance,	Humayun	pulled	on	the	reins	to	turn
his	mount	again	and	attacked	the	officer	head	on.	The	man	raised	his	metal	shield	to	parry	Humayun’s
first	 sword	 stroke	 but	 was	 too	 slow	 in	 getting	 the	 heavy	 shield	 down	 to	 prevent	 Humayun’s	 second
catching	him	in	his	side	where	it	was	unprotected	by	his	breastplate.	He	was	not	wearing	chain	mail	so
the	sword	bit	deep	into	muscle	and	rib	cartilage.	As	the	officer	instinctively	dropped	his	shield	and
grasped	at	his	wound,	Humayun	slashed	again,	this	time	across	the	man’s	throat,	nearly	severing	his

head,	and	the	officer	fell	from	the	saddle.
Bent	on	vengeance,	another	of	the	officer ’s	bodyguards	next	engaged	Humayun,	wielding	a	twoheaded	axe.	He	was	soon	joined	by	a	second	and	then	a	third,	both	with	long,	double-edged	swords.
Humayun	held	them	off,	wheeling	his	nimble	brown	horse	and	parrying	their	blows	but	suffering	a
minor	wound	to	his	cheek	from	a	sharp	sword,	until	some	of	his	own	guards	galloped	up	to	assist
him.	Before	long,	two	of	his	attackers	were	stretched	on	the	stony	earth,	cut	down	by	Humayun	with
sword	strokes	to	head	and	neck.	The	third	had	dropped	his	sword	and	was	fleeing,	blood	from	a	spear
thrust	 to	 his	 thigh	 inflicted	 by	 one	 of	 Humayun’s	 guards	 pouring	 down	 his	 saddle	 and	 staining	 his
horse’s	light	coat.
‘We	have	driven	off	most	of	Sher	Shah’s	cavalry.	His	musketeers	and	archers	are	pulling	back	too,’
a	breathless	officer	reported.
‘Good.	Establish	our	archers	and	musketeers	among	the	boulders	where	those	of	Sher	Shah	were.
Turn	over	some	of	those	baggage	wagons	to	make	extra	barricades	and	get	some	of	the	guns	pulled
round	ready	to	fire	if	Sher	Shah	tries	another	flank	attack.’
As	his	men	went	to	work,	pushing	and	straining	at	the	large	wooden	baggage	carts	to	topple	them
and	bringing	up	oxen	to	move	the	cannon,	Humayun	rode	towards	a	point	a	few	hundred	yards	away
on	the	ridge	where	he	could	get	a	better	view	of	the	battlefield	and	ponder	his	next	move.	On	reaching
it,	his	decision	was	made	for	him.	Sher	Shah’s	horsemen	had	broken	through	the	middle	of	his	line	of
earth	ramparts	about	three-quarters	of	a	mile	away	and	his	own	men	were	retreating	before	them.
‘What	 happened?’	 Humayun	 demanded	 of	 a	 short,	 dark	 officer	 on	 a	 brown	 and	 white	 horse	 who
was	leading	a	party	of	about	fifty	tough-looking	Badakhshani	archers	forward.
‘I	am	not	certain,	Majesty,	but	I	was	told	that	after	Sher	Shah’s	first	attack	surprised	us	by	dividing
to	encircle	the	ends	of	our	lines,	he	ordered	a	second	wave	of	horsemen	to	gallop	down	the	ridge	in
close	 formation	 to	 assault	 the	 very	 centre	 of	 our	 ramparts,	 a	 position	 which	 was	 weakened	 –	 as	 he
knew	it	would	be,	I	am	sure	–	by	our	withdrawal	of	troops	to	protect	the	flanks.	So	fierce	was	their
charge	 that	 they	 overwhelmed	 our	 remaining	 defenders	 and	 drove	 deep	 into	 the	 very	 centre	 of	 our
camp.	Baba	Yasaval	sent	orders	for	us	to	advance	to	help	defend	the	position	he	has	established	over
there,	around	the	base	of	that	outcrop.’
Looking	in	the	direction	of	the	officer ’s	pointing	arm,	Humayun	saw	a	great	mêlée	of	horsemen
and	could	just	make	out	Baba	Yasaval’s	yellow	flag.	‘I	trust	in	the	bravery	of	you	and	your	men.	We
will	drive	Sher	Shah	back.	I	will	summon	my	mounted	bodyguard	and	precede	you	into	the	fight.’
‘Majesty.’
Humayun	turned	and,	beckoning	his	bodyguards	to	follow,	galloped	back	up	the	rise	of	the	ridge
towards	the	outcrop	where	the	fighting	was	centred.	As	he	rode,	he	could	see	more	and	more	of	Sher
Shah’s	 men	 pouring	 through	 the	 undefended	 breach	 in	 his	 earth	 ramparts	 and	 joining	 the	 battle
around	 the	 outcrop.	 As	 he	 got	 nearer,	 he	 encountered	 a	 small	 group	 of	 his	 own	 foot	 soldiers	 who
were	running	away,	abandoning	positions	which	had	not	yet	even	come	under	direct	attack.	Reining	in
his	horse	he	shouted	to	them	to	return,	that	all	was	not	lost	–	but	they	ran	on,	eyes	fixed	and	fearful,
heading	for	Kanauj	and	its	crossings	over	the	nearby	Ganges.
Only	a	minute	or	two	later,	Humayun	was	on	the	edge	of	the	heaving	mass	of	men	and	of	horses
around	the	outcrop.	He	saw	a	loose	horse	gallop	away	with	part	of	its	intestines	protruding	from	a
great	 cut	 to	 its	 belly.	 Several	 bodies	 lay	 sprawled	 on	 the	 ground,	 attackers	 and	 defenders
indistinguishable	 in	 death.	 Baba	 Yasaval’s	 soldiers	 seemed	 to	 be	 slowly	 yielding	 ground	 and	 being
forced	back	against	the	steep	side	of	the	outcrop	but	Humayun	could	still	see	Baba	Yasaval’s	yellow
flag	flying	in	the	middle	of	the	fight.	Immediately	he	charged	towards	it,	leaving	his	bodyguards	to

follow	as	best	they	could.
Humayun’s	 brown	 horse	 stumbled	 on	 the	 mangled	 body	 of	 one	 rider	 whose	 skull	 had	 a	 great
bloody	 cleft	 in	 it	 but	 Humayun	 was	 a	 good	 horseman	 and	 the	 beast	 was	 nimble	 and	 recovered,
carrying	Humayun	further	into	the	press.	He	struck	one	of	Sher	Shah’s	cavalry	from	the	saddle	with	a
single	stroke	of	his	sword	Alamgir,	wounded	the	horse	of	a	second	in	the	neck,	causing	it	to	throw	its
rider	 before,	 collapsing	 to	 the	 ground	 with	 a	 severed	 windpipe,	 it	 brought	 down	 another	 horseman
who	had	been	preparing	to	attack	Humayun	from	behind.	Humayun	was	now	what	seemed	only	twenty
or	 so	 yards	 from	 Baba	 Yasaval.	 Spying	 a	 gap,	 Humayun	 pressed	 forward	 towards	 his	 commander
through	riders	too	deeply	engaged	in	fighting	each	other	to	notice	him.
As	he	did	so,	Humayun	saw	that	in	fact	Baba	Yasaval	had	only	about	a	dozen	of	his	men	around
him.	Three	or	four	of	them	had	lost	their	horses	and	Baba	Yasaval	and	their	comrades	were	trying	to
protect	them	as	they	held	off	Sher	Shah’s	more	numerous	attackers.	At	that	very	moment,	however,
one	 of	 their	 assailants	 –	 a	 large,	 purple-turbaned	 man	 with	 a	 bushy	 black	 beard	 armed	 with	 a	 long
lance	–	kicked	his	horse	towards	one	of	the	dismounted	men	who	was	becoming	separated	from	the
rest.	 Despite	 getting	 his	 shield	 up	 in	 front	 of	 him	 to	 ward	 off	 the	 lance	 tip,	 the	 man	 was	 unable	 to
withstand	the	weight	of	the	charge	which	knocked	him	off	his	feet.	He	tried	desperately	to	roll	away
from	under	the	hooves	of	his	attacker ’s	horse	towards	his	companions	but,	as	he	did	so,	the	purpleturbaned	horseman	pulled	back	his	lance	and	taking	deliberate	aim	skewered	him	through	the	belly
before	any	of	Baba	Yasaval’s	other	soldiers	could	intervene.	Quickly	twisting	his	blood-tipped	lance
out	 of	 the	 body,	 the	 purple-turbaned	 man	 –	 surely	 an	 officer	 –	 retreated	 back	 into	 the	 mass	 of	 his
fellows.The	whole	incident	had	taken	less	than	a	minute,	during	which	Humayun	had	pushed	through
to	Baba	Yasaval’s	side.
‘Majesty,	 where	 are	 your	 bodyguards?’	 Baba	 Yasaval	 broke	 off	 from	 waving	 his	 own	 men	 back
into	tighter	formation.	Humayun	suddenly	realised	that	none	of	them	had	succeeded	in	following	him
through	 the	 press	 and	 that	 Sher	 Shah’s	 fighters	 now	 completely	 filled	 the	 small	 corridor	 through
which	he	had	come.	They	had	almost	surrounded	himself	and	Baba	Yasaval	and	his	men,	cutting	them
off	from	either	help	or	retreat.
‘Baba	 Yasaval,	 we	 must	 keep	 as	 close	 order	 as	 we	 can	 to	 protect	 ourselves	 and	 each	 other	 until
either	more	of	our	warriors	arrive	or	we	can	identify	a	break-out	route.	If	we	keep	our	backs	to	the
wall	of	the	outcrop	our	rear	at	least	will	be	protected.’
Humayun	and	Baba	Yasaval	waved	their	other	soldiers	together,	but	as	they	attempted	to	obey,	three
of	Sher	Shah’s	riders	surrounded	a	horseman	and	one	of	them	knocked	him	from	his	mount	with	a
swinging	flail.	One	of	the	fallen	man’s	companions	kicked	his	own	horse	forward	to	try	to	save	him
only	to	be	killed	instantly	by	a	stroke	from	a	two-headed	battleaxe	which	caught	him	by	his	Adam’s
apple	and	decapitated	him.	Another	of	Sher	Shah’s	men	meanwhile	despatched	the	man	knocked	from
his	 saddle	 by	 the	 flail.	 At	 the	 same	 time,	 the	 purple-turbaned	 officer	 separated	 another	 of	 Baba
Yasaval’s	unhorsed	men	from	his	protectors	and	stuck	him	in	the	groin	with	his	lance.	The	wounded
soldier ’s	legs	and	heels	thrashed	against	the	ground	for	about	a	minute	and	then	he	lay	still.
There	were	now	only	nine	men	left	with	Baba	Yasaval	and	Humayun,	two	of	whom	were	unhorsed
and	another	badly	wounded	in	the	head.	Then,	the	purple-turbaned	officer	waved	Sher	Shah’s	riders	in
for	the	kill	as	Humayun	and	his	soldiers	retreated	until	they	were	only	a	few	yards	from	the	side	of
the	outcrop.	At	this	point	it	was	almost	twenty	feet	high	and	nearly	sheer,	clearly	impossible	to	ride	up
on	a	horse	and	offering	no	obvious	route	for	a	climber	on	foot.
One	of	the	nine	men	with	Baba	Yasaval	was	a	young	trumpeter	whose	smooth-skinned	face	had	as
yet	 no	 need	 of	 the	 barber.	 He	 still	 had	 his	 instrument	 strapped	 to	 his	 back.	 Baba	 Yasaval	 shouted	 to

him,	 ‘Sound	 your	 trumpet	 so	 we	 may	 get	 help.	 The	 rest	 of	 you	 protect	 him	 while	 he	 does	 so.’	 The
trumpeter	 succeeded	 in	 taking	 his	 three-foot-long	 trumpet	 from	 his	 back	 and	 putting	 it	 to	 his	 lips.
However,	at	first	no	sound	came	and	the	youth	looked	at	Baba	Yasaval	in	alarm	and	panic.
‘Calmly,	boy,’	said	Baba	Yasaval.	‘The	excitement	and	fear	of	battle	have	dried	your	mouth.	Cough
and	try	to	wet	your	lips	with	your	tongue.’
The	 youth	 obediently	 coughed	 and	 licked	 his	 lips	 before	 trying	 again.This	 time,	 the	 full	 sound
issued	from	the	trumpet’s	brass	mouth	–	the	rallying	call	of	Humayun’s	men.
‘And	again,	boy,	and	again!’
Three	more	of	Humayun’s	riders	had	been	killed	in	valiantly	providing	protection	for	the	young
trumpeter	before	suddenly	the	purple-turbaned	officer	swerved	his	black	horse	towards	the	trumpeter
and	with	his	long	lance	caught	the	boy	in	his	right	armpit,	exposed	as	he	kept	the	trumpet	to	his	lips,
unhorsing	him.	He	was	killed	by	a	further	stab	of	his	assailant’s	lance	as	he	lay	on	the	ground.
Humayun,	 seeing	 another	 of	 Sher	 Shah’s	 horsemen	 ride	 towards	 one	 of	 the	 two	 remaining	 men
who	were	on	foot,	kicked	his	own	horse	to	meet	the	rider ’s	charge,	blocking	his	path	to	his	target.	As
the	 man	 pulled	 hard	 at	 his	 reins	 to	 guide	 his	 mount	 round	 Humayun,	 Humayun	 cut	 at	 his	 wrists
severing	 one	 of	 his	 hands,	 causing	 the	 rider	 to	 lose	 control	 and	 be	 carried	 away	 into	 the	 mêlée.
Humayun	extended	his	hand	to	the	man	on	foot	to	pull	him	up	behind	him	on	his	horse.	But	as	he	did
so,	 a	 spear	 thrown	 by	 an	 unknown	 assailant	 pierced	 the	 soldier ’s	 chest	 and	 another	 spear	 hit
Humayun’s	horse	in	the	neck.	It	staggered	and	collapsed,	blood	pouring	from	the	wound.
Humayun	slipped	from	the	saddle	and,	as	the	purple-turbaned	officer	kicked	on	to	attack	him,	ran
back	towards	the	steep	face	of	the	outcrop,	zigzagging	sharply	to	put	the	rider	off	his	aim	with	his
deadly	lance.	Coming	close	to	the	rock	face,	Humayun	realised	it	was	indeed	impossible	to	climb,	at
least	with	an	assailant	armed	with	a	long	lance	close	behind.	So	Humayun	turned	at	bay,	with	Alamgir
in	his	right	hand	and	a	foot-long,	serrated-edged	dagger	drawn	from	his	belt	in	his	left.	Pivoting	on
the	balls	of	his	feet	so	that	he	could	dart	this	way	and	that	once	the	officer	attacked,	Humayun	waited.
The	officer	charged	seconds	later,	his	lance	tip	pointed	at	Humayun	who	left	it	until	the	very	last
moment	 to	 jump	 aside.	 Thwarted,	 the	 officer	 swerved	 and	 turned	 to	 try	 again.	 As	 he	 did	 so,	 Baba
Yasaval	 –	 now	 unhorsed	 too	 and	 bleeding	 from	 a	 deep	 sword	 slash	 to	 his	 face	 –	 ran	 in	 front	 of
Humayun	and,	as	the	officer	charged,	struck	at	his	horse.	He	succeeded	in	bringing	the	animal	down
but	 at	 the	 cost	 of	 taking	 its	 rider ’s	 lance	 full	 in	 the	 abdomen.	 Humayun	 ran	 forward	 towards	 the
purple-turbaned	man	who,	although	winded	by	his	fall	from	his	horse,	was	quickly	on	his	feet	with
sword	drawn	to	parry	Humayun’s	first	blow	with	Alamgir.	He	managed	to	fend	off	the	second	blow
too	but	while	he	did	so,	Humayun	struck	with	the	dagger	in	his	left	hand,	striking	the	man	in	the	throat
and	twisting	the	dagger ’s	jagged	blade	as	it	entered	to	cause	fatal	damage.	The	officer ’s	warm	blood
spurted	all	over	Humayun’s	hand.
‘Majesty,	we	heard	the	trumpet,’	a	voice	came	from	above	on	top	of	the	vertical	outcrop.	Humayun
glanced	up.	Some	of	his	men	–	from	the	cast	of	their	features	and	the	colour	and	cut	of	their	orange
clothes	members	of	the	army	of	one	of	his	Rajput	vassals	–	had	succeeded	in	getting	on	top	of	the
outcrop	and	were	peering	over	the	edge.	As	Humayun	turned	again	to	face	his	attackers	–	he	seemed
to	be	the	only	survivor	of	those	trapped	beneath	the	outcrop	–	one	of	the	Rajputs	fired	a	black-shafted
arrow,	felling	the	horse	of	one	of	Sher	Shah’s	men.	A	second	arrow	wounded	another	man	in	the	leg.
The	rest	of	Humayun’s	attackers	recoiled	as	if	to	consider	their	next	move.	In	the	few	seconds	while
they	did	so,	the	Rajput	archer	uncoiled	his	orange	turban	from	around	his	head.	He	threw	one	end	of
the	 material,	 which	 was	 about	 ten	 feet	 long,	 over	 the	 edge	 of	 the	 outcrop	 where	 it	 hung	 blowing
slightly	in	the	breeze	about	a	foot	above	Humayun’s	head.

‘Grab	hold	of	my	turban	cloth,	Majesty.	I	will	pull	you	to	safety.’
Humayun	hesitated	and	looked	around	him.	Baba	Yasaval	was	still	lying	where	he’d	fallen,	slumped
against	the	steep	side	of	the	outcrop.	His	helmetless	head	with	its	grey	stubble	was	down	on	his	chest
and	 trickles	 of	 blood	 were	 still	 seeping	 from	 his	 nostrils	 and	 the	 corners	 of	 his	 lips	 and	 dripping
down	 on	 to	 his	 breastplate.	 His	 arms	 were	 by	 his	 side	 but	 his	 legs	 were	 splayed	 and	 the	 lance	 still
protruded	from	his	abdomen.	He	was	surely	dead	and	Humayun	could	see	no	sign	of	life	in	any	other
of	his	men.
Any	moment	now	his	attackers	would	close	in	again	to	finish	him	off,	Humayun	realised.	His	duty
to	 both	 his	 destiny	 and	 his	 dynasty	 was	 to	 save	 himself.	 Transferring	 Alamgir	 to	 his	 left	 hand,	 he
reached	up	with	his	right	and	grasped	the	orange	turban	cloth	tightly.	Immediately	he	felt	the	material
tauten	and	as	he	scrambled	with	his	feet	against	the	stone	rock	face	for	added	impetus	he	began	to	rise.
Suddenly,	his	attackers,	seeing	that	he	was	about	to	escape,	rushed	towards	him.
Humayun	slashed	awkwardly	at	the	foremost	of	them	with	Alamgir	in	his	left	hand	but	the	cut	went
home,	the	sharp	blade	slicing	into	the	man’s	forehead	as	he	looked	upward,	almost	detaching	a	flap	of
skin	and	causing	blood	to	pour	down	into	his	eyes.	At	the	same	time,	Humayun	felt	the	air	move	close
to	him	as	a	Rajput	from	above	threw	his	battleaxe	at	the	next	attacker,	catching	him	in	the	muscle	of
his	 upper	 arm,	 and	 he	 too	 fell	 back.	 A	 third	 hesitated	 for	 a	 moment	 and	 that	 hesitation	 allowed
Humayun	to	scramble	and	pull	himself	over	the	edge	and	on	to	the	top	of	the	outcrop.	He	scarcely
noticed	that	the	scar	tissue	on	his	right	forearm	and	hand	had	opened	up	under	the	pressure	imposed
on	it	as	he	had	been	pulled	up	and	was	now	bleeding	profusely.
‘Majesty.’	The	Rajput	who	had	thrown	the	turban	cloth	spoke	urgently	as	he	helped	Humayun	to	his
feet.	 ‘We	 have	 a	 fresh	 horse	 for	 you.	 Everywhere	 your	 men	 are	 retreating.	 Unless	 you	 too	 ride
quickly	away	you	will	be	captured	or	killed.’
Looking	round,	Humayun	realised	that	he	had	indeed	only	two	choices	–	to	retreat	to	fight	another
day	 or	 die	 in	 battle.	 However	 much	 the	 latter	 appealed	 to	 his	 warrior ’s	 honour,	 he	 felt	 that	 life	 and
ambition	still	burned	bright	within	him	and	that	fate	had	better	in	store	for	her	fortunate	son	than	a
futile	if	courageous	death.	He	must	live.
‘Let	us	ride	and	regroup	as	many	of	our	forces	as	we	can.’

Chapter	9
Brothers
The	hot,	still	air,	already	heavy	with	the	moisture	that	in	a	week	or	so	would	begin	to	pour	from	the
skies,	 was	 oppressive.	 Beneath	 his	 chain	 mail	 and	 fine-woven	 cotton	 tunic,	 sweat	 trickled	 down
Humayun’s	back.	His	face	too	was	beaded	with	it.	Impatiently	he	wiped	it	away	with	a	face	cloth	only
to	feel	the	salty	drops	immediately	re-form.	The	drumming	of	his	bay	horse’s	hooves	as	he	galloped
back	towards	Agra,	bodyguards	ahead	and	a	detachment	of	cavalry	including	his	loyal	orange-clad
Rajputs	behind	him,	seemed	to	pound	out	a	bitter	message.	Defeat	and	failure.	Defeat	and	failure.	The
words	echoed	around	his	head	but	even	so	he	could	scarcely	believe	what	had	happened.
The	troops	he	had	hoped	to	reassemble	had	melted	away.	Some	had	returned	to	their	own	provinces
but	 more	 had	 deserted	 to	 Sher	 Shah’s	 advancing	 armies.	 That	 they	 should	 believe	 the	 son	 of	 a	 low
horse	trader	could	overthrow	the	Moghuls	.	.	.	the	enormity	hurt	more	than	a	physical	wound,	but	even
worse	was	the	thought	that,	for	all	his	courage	in	battle,	he	had	allowed	it	to	happen.
Where	 was	 his	 good	 fortune	 now?	 At	 Panipat,	 Hindustan	 had	 dropped	 like	 a	 ripe,	 juicy
pomegranate	 into	 the	 Moghuls’	 outstretched	 hands.	 The	 ease	 with	 which	 he	 had	 defeated	 Bahadur
Shah	 and	 the	 Lodi	 pretenders	 had	 made	 him	 think	 his	 dynasty	 invincible.	 Perhaps	 he	 hadn’t
understood	the	nature	of	his	new	empire	–	that	rebellion	was	endemic.	However	many	insurrections
he	quashed,	however	many	rebels’	heads	he	struck	off,	there	would	always	be	more.	Inspired	by	Sher
Shah’s	success,	enemies	were	now	menacing	him	from	the	west	and	south	as	well	as	from	the	east.
In	his	frustration,	Humayun	slapped	his	gauntleted	hand	so	hard	against	the	pommel	of	his	saddle
that	 his	 startled	 horse	 skittered	 sideways,	 tossing	 its	 head	 and	 snorting,	 almost	 unseating	 him.
Gripping	 hard	 with	 his	 knees	 he	 managed	 to	 steady	 it,	 then	 relaxing	 the	 reins	 leaned	 forward	 and
patted	its	sweating	neck	to	reassure	it.	Anyway,	with	luck	he	and	his	advance	party	should	be	in	Agra
before	 nightfall.	 Though	 it	 would	 be	 another	 week,	 maybe	 longer,	 until	 the	 rest	 of	 his	 army	 –	 the
artillery	wagons,	baggage	carts	and	thousands	of	pack	beasts	–	reached	the	city,	he	would	have	a	little
time	to	consider	his	next	move.	According	to	his	scouts,	Sher	Shah	had	halted	his	advance,	at	least	for
the	moment,	not	moving	far	beyond	Kanauj.	Perhaps	he	too	was	taking	stock	.	.	.
In	 fact	 it	 wasn’t	 till	 after	 midnight	 that	 Humayun’s	 exhausted	 horse	 carried	 him	 through	 the	 dark
streets	 of	 Agra,	 along	 the	 banks	 of	 the	 Jumna	 and	 up	 into	 the	 fort.	 The	 kettledrums	 above	 the
gatehouse	boomed	out	into	the	night	as,	by	the	orange	light	of	torches	flickering	in	sconces	high	on
the	walls,	he	rode	up	the	steep	ramp	into	the	courtyard.	A	groom	rushed	to	take	the	reins	as	Humayun
lowered	his	weary	body	from	the	saddle.
‘Majesty.’	 A	 dark-robed	 figure	 moved	 forward.	 As	 it	 came	 closer,	 Humayun	 recognised	 his
grandfather,	 Baisanghar.	 Normally	 so	 strong,	 even	 forceful,	 his	 face	 looked	 haggard,	 for	 once
showing	 every	 one	 of	 his	 seventy-two	 years	 and	 it	 told	 Humayun	 immediately	 that	 something
unforeseen	and	unwelcome	had	occured.
‘What	is	it?	What’s	happened?’
‘Your	mother	is	ill.	For	the	past	six	weeks	she	has	complained	of	a	pain	in	her	breast	so	sharp	that

only	 opium	 can	 bring	 her	 relief.	 The	 hakims	 say	 they	 can	 do	 nothing	 for	 her.	 I	 wanted	 to	 send
messengers	to	you	but	she	insisted	I	should	not	distract	you	from	your	campaign	.	.	.	yet	I	know	she
longs	to	see	you.	It’s	all	that	has	kept	her	alive	.	.	.’
‘I	will	go	to	her.’	Hurrying	across	the	stone	flagstones	towards	his	mother ’s	apartments,	Humayun
no	 longer	 saw	 the	 red	 sandstone	 fortress	 around	 him.	 Instead,	 he	 was	 a	 boy	 again	 in	 Kabul	 –
galloping	 his	 pony	 through	 the	 grassy	 meadows,	 firing	 arrows	 from	 the	 saddle	 at	 the	 straw	 targets
Baisanghar	had	set	up	and	already	rehearsing	wildly	inflated	stories	of	his	skill	and	daring	with	which
to	impress	Maham.
As	he	entered	his	mother ’s	sickroom,	the	soothing	smell	of	frankincense	filled	his	nostrils.	It	came
from	 four	 tall	 incense	 burners	 set	 up	 around	 her	 couch	 in	 which	 the	 golden	 crystals	 of	 resin	 were
smouldering.	Maham	looked	very	small	beneath	the	green	coverlet,	the	skin	on	her	face	paper	thin,
but	her	large,	dark	eyes	still	had	their	beauty	and	they	warmed	as	they	rested	on	her	son.	Humayun
bent	and	kissed	her	forehead.	‘Forgive	me	–	I	come	to	you	with	the	sweat	and	dust	of	the	journey	still
upon	me.’
‘My	beautiful	warrior	.	.	.	Your	father	was	so	proud	of	you	.	.	.	he	always	said	you	were	the	most
worthy	of	all	his	sons,	the	most	fit	to	rule	.	.	.	Among	his	last	words	to	me	were,	“Maham,	although	I
have	 other	 sons,	 I	 love	 none	 as	 I	 love	 your	 Humayun.	 He	 will	 achieve	 his	 heart’s	 desire.	 None	 can
equal	 him.”’	 She	 touched	 his	 cheek	 with	 her	 dry	 hand.	 ‘How	 is	 it	 with	 you,	 my	 son,	 my	 emperor?
Have	you	defeated	our	enemies?’
So	they	had	kept	the	news	of	his	reverses	from	her,	Humayun	thought	with	relief.	‘Yes,	Mother,	all
is	well.	Sleep	now.	I	will	come	to	you	in	the	morning	and	we	will	talk	again.’	But	Maham’s	eyes	were
already	closing	and	Humayun	doubted	she’d	heard	him.
Khanzada	was	waiting	for	him	in	the	antechamber.	She	looked	drawn	–	Humayun	guessed	she	had
spent	 many	 hours	 by	 Maham’s	 bedside	 –	 but	 her	 face	 lit	 at	 the	 sight	 of	 him.	 ‘I	 gave	 thanks	 when	 I
heard	you	had	reached	Agra	in	safety,’	she	said	as	he	kissed	her	cheek.
‘I	must	speak	with	the	hakims	.	.	.	’
‘They	have	done	what	they	can.	We	even	sent	messengers	to	consult	Abdul-Malik,	knowing	how	his
skill	saved	your	father	when	he	was	poisoned.	Though	he	is	old	and	half	blind,	his	mind	is	still	clear.
But	 when	 told	 of	 the	 symptoms	 he	 said	 nothing	 could	 be	 done	 except	 to	 ease	 Maham’s	 pain.’
Khanzada	paused.	‘She	was	waiting	for	one	thing	only	–	to	see	you	again,	Humayun.	Now	she	will	die
happy	.	.	.	’
Humayun	looked	down	at	Timur ’s	ring	on	his	battle-scarred	hand.	‘I	lied	to	her	just	now	.	.	.	I	told
her	I	had	conquered	our	enemies.	But	as	she	looks	down	on	me	from	Paradise	I	will	make	her	proud
–	I	swear	it	.	.	.	’	Without	warning,	he	felt	tears	running	down	his	cheeks.
Two	days	later,	Humayun	was	one	of	the	four	men	carrying	the	sandalwood	coffin	containing	his
mother ’s	body,	washed	in	camphor	water	and	wrapped	in	soft	woollen	blankets,	down	to	the	Jumna
where	a	boat	was	waiting.	A	bright,	flower-filled	garden	–	one	of	several	planted	by	his	father	Babur
on	 the	 far	 bank	 of	 the	 river	 and	 now	 coming	 to	 maturity	 –	 would	 be	 her	 resting	 place.	 Humayun
glanced	 at	 Baisanghar,	 walking	 beside	 him.	 Despite	 his	 age	 he	 had	 insisted	 on	 accompanying	 his
daughter	 on	 her	 final	 journey.	 How	 stooped	 and	 frail	 he	 looked	 –	 no	 longer	 the	 warrior	 who	 had
hazarded	his	life	to	help	Babur	capture	Samarkand.
An	even	deeper	melancholy	took	hold	of	Humayun	–	not	only	grief	at	Maham’s	death	but	a	sense
that	 many	 of	 the	 certainties	 of	 his	 youth	 were	 crumbling.	 All	 his	 life	 he’d	 been	 a	 pampered	 prince,
brought	up	to	expect	great	things	as	of	right,	confident	of	his	place	in	the	world.	Never	before	had	he
felt	so	insignificant,	so	vulnerable	to	the	buffeting	of	others’	actions.	Never	before	had	he	felt	it	so

difficult	to	control	his	destiny.
As	 he	 and	 the	 other	 coffin	 bearers	 reached	 the	 riverbank,	 Humayun	 raised	 his	 face	 to	 the	 heavy
grey	skies.	Without	warning,	the	rain	began	to	fall,	at	first	in	large,	fat	drops	but	soon	in	a	ceaseless
sheet	that	drenched	his	dark	mourning	robes.	Perhaps	the	rain	was	a	sign,	sent	to	cleanse	him	of	his
doubts,	to	tell	him	that	though	some	things	must	end,	there	could	always	be	a	fresh	beginning	for	a
leader	who	never	despaired	in	the	face	of	grief	or	adversity	but	kept	his	belief	in	himself	and	in	his
ultimate	triumph.

Humayun	looked	around	at	his	counsellors,	like	him	dressed	in	the	mourning	that	custom	demanded
they	wear	for	forty	days.	Maham	had	been	dead	for	only	fourteen	of	those	days	but	if	the	alarming
reports	reaching	him	were	accurate,	little	time	was	left	for	observing	the	courtesies	to	the	dead.
‘You’re	certain,	Ahmed	Khan	.	.	.	?’
‘Yes,	Majesty’,	responded	his	travel-stained	chief	scout.‘Sher	Shah	is	advancing	fast	with	an	army
at	least	three	hundred	thousand	strong.	I	saw	the	vanguard	with	my	own	eyes	just	five	days’	ride	east
from	here.’
‘This	matches	other	reports	that	have	been	coming	in,	Majesty,’	said	Kasim.	‘Despite	the	start	of	the
rains,	Sher	Shah	is	making	good	progress.’
At	least	Sher	Shah	hadn’t	caught	up	with	his	retreating	army,	Humayun	thought.	The	main	force	had
reached	 Agra	 safely	 nearly	 a	 week	 ago	 though	 many	 had	 deserted	 along	 the	 road.	 ‘So	 he	 means	 to
attack	us	here	in	Agra	.	.	.	How	many	troops	do	we	have	left?’	Humayun	turned	to	Zahid	Beg,	the	tall,
thin	officer	he	had	made	his	commander-of-horse	in	place	of	Baba	Yasaval.
‘Around	 eighty	 thousand	 including	 the	 returning	 forces	 from	 Kanauj,	 Majesty,	 but	 the	 number
diminishes	every	day	.	.	.	’
Raising	 his	 head,	 Humayun	 looked	 down	 the	 length	 of	 his	 audience	 chamber	 to	 the	 courtyard
beyond.	The	rain	had	ceased	temporarily	and	in	the	shafts	of	sunlight	the	red	sandstone	glowed.This
fortress	 had	 been	 the	 Moghuls’	 greatest	 stronghold	 ever	 since	 they	 had	 swept	 down	 to	 conquer
Hindustan.	Last	night	before	retiring	into	the	pleasures	of	the	haram	he	had	stood	on	the	battlements
with	his	astrologer,	Sharaf,	and	together	they	had	gazed	into	the	night	sky.	But	Sharaf	had	been	unable
to	find	any	messages	written	there	–	or	in	his	charts	and	tables.Was	the	silence	of	the	stars	God’s	way
of	showing	him	that	he	and	he	alone	must	find	a	way	of	saving	his	dynasty.	.	.	?
‘Ahmed	 Khan’s	 news	 confirms	 what	 I	 had	 already	 feared.	 We	 have	 no	 choice	 but	 to	 retreat	 from
Agra,’	Humayun	said	at	last.	There	was	an	audible	gasp.
‘Abandon	Agra,	Majesty?’	Kasim	looked	shocked.
‘Yes.	That	is	the	only	way.’
‘But	where	will	we	go?’
‘Northwest,	to	Lahore.	That	will	buy	us	time	and	I	will	be	able	to	summon	more	troops	from	Kabul
–	the	clans	there	will	welcome	a	chance	for	some	plunder	.	.	.	’
A	long	silence	followed,	then	Baisanghar	spoke.	‘Many	years	ago	when	I	was	still	young	and	with
Babur	in	Samarkand,	we	faced	an	enemy	–	Shaibani	Khan	and	his	numberless	Uzbeks	whom	we	knew
we	could	not	defeat.	The	only	alternative	to	retreat	was	the	death	of	thousands	of	our	people.	Babur,
with	the	courage	and	foresight	that	made	him	so	great,	understood	that.	Though	it	grieved	his	warrior

soul	to	yield	Timur ’s	city	to	the	barbarian	Uzbeks,	he	knew	he	must	.	.	.	Just	as	we	must	leave	Agra	.	.	.
’
Humayun	looked	down.	Baisanghar ’s	words	were	the	truth.	But	what	he	hadn’t	said	was	that,	as	part
of	the	bargain,	Shaibani	Khan	had	demanded	Khanzada	as	a	wife	and	Babur	had	been	forced	to	yield
her	up.	For	ten	years	she	had	endured	life	in	the	haram	 of	 a	 man	 with	 a	 visceral	 hatred	 of	 Timur ’s
descendants	 who	 had	 enjoyed	 trying	 to	 break	 her	 spirit.	 He	 had	 failed.Whatever	 happened,	 he,
Humayun,	would	make	sure	that	no	such	fate	overtook	her	again.
‘We	 are	 retreating,	 not	 running	 away.	 Though	 we	 will	 ride	 out	 tomorrow	 morning	 at	 dawn,
everything	 must	 be	 done	 in	 an	 orderly	 fashion	 .	 .	 .	 Kasim,	 assemble	 the	 officers	 of	 the	 imperial
household	 and	 ensure	 that	 they	 and	 their	 servants	 carry	 out	 my	 commands	 swiftly	 and	 without
question.	The	contents	of	the	royal	treasuries	in	Agra	must	be	transferred	into	strongboxes.	Anything
else	of	great	value	must	also	be	packed	to	go	with	us	–	I	will	leave	Sher	Shah	nothing	that	will	help
him.	Zahid	Beg,	prepare	our	troops.	Tell	them	that	we	are	riding	to	Lahore	to	join	our	forces	coming
from	Kabul.	And	make	sure	all	our	muskets	and	all	the	ammunition	are	securely	loaded	on	to	bullock
carts	and	the	cannon	made	ready	for	travel.	Say	nothing,	do	nothing	to	suggest	defeat	or	flight	or	that
we	are	in	any	way	afraid	of	Sher	Shah.’
Humayun	paused	and	looked	around.	‘And	you,	Ahmed	Khan,	choose	your	fastest	and	best	young
riders	 to	 carry	 letters	 to	 my	 half-brothers	 with	 orders	 to	 leave	 sufficient	 troops	 to	 hold	 their
provinces	but	to	join	me	with	the	rest	at	Lahore.	I	myself	will	write	the	letters	and	mark	them	with	the
imperial	seal	so	my	brothers	are	in	no	doubt	it	is	the	emperor	who	commands	them.	Now	hurry,	there
is	little	time	.	.	.	’
Humayun	 neither	 slept	 nor	 visited	 the	 haram	 that	 night	 –	 there	 was	 too	 much	 to	 attend	 to.	 In	 any
case	the	hours	of	darkness	were	punctuated	by	the	frequent	arrival	of	scouts	bringing	fresh	and	ever
more	disquieting	news	of	the	progress	of	Sher	Shah’s	advance	troops.	If	they	maintained	their	present
pace,	their	vanguard	could	reach	Agra	in	as	little	as	three	or	four	days’	time,	Humayun	calculated.
Even	before	the	sky	was	lightening	to	the	east,	the	first	detachments	of	Humayun’s	army,	pennants
streaming	 in	 the	 warm	 breeze,	 were	 moving	 out,	 their	 task	 to	 secure	 the	 route	 ahead.	 Once	 word
spread	that	he	was	leaving	Agra,	the	populace	might	become	restive	and	dacoits	might	take	the	chance
for	 some	 mischief.	 The	 task	 of	 Humayun’s	 vanguard	 –	 in	 their	 burnished	 steel	 breastplates	 and
mounted	on	fresh	horses	from	the	imperial	stables	–	was	to	impress	them	with	a	show	of	power.	And
he	was	still	powerful,	Humayun	told	himself.	He	still	had	nearly	eighty	thousand	men	under	arms	–
far	more	than	he	and	his	father	had	had	at	Panipat.
Looking	 down	 from	 his	 apartments	 into	 the	 courtyard	 below,	 he	 saw	 the	 royal	 women	 and	 their
attendants	preparing	to	climb	into	the	carts	and	litters	that	had	been	prepared	for	them.	They	would
travel	in	the	heart	of	the	column,	with	guards	positioned	around	them	in	a	protective	cordon,	and	to
the	front	and	rear	would	be	further	lines	of	specially	assigned	cavalry.	But	Humayun	had	ordered	that
Khanzada	 and	 his	 half-sister	 Gulbadan	 should	 ride	 close	 to	 him	 on	 one	 of	 the	 imperial	 elephants.
Salima,	still	his	favourite	concubine,	would	follow	behind	on	another.
Behind	the	women	would	come	the	baggage	wagons	with	all	the	equipment	for	the	imperial	camp	–
the	tents	and	mobile	bathhouses,	the	cooking	pots	and	other	utensils	necessary	for	the	four-hundredmile	journey	northwest.	And,	of	course,	the	imperial	treasure	in	the	huge	iron-bound	travelling	chests
whose	intricate	locks	required	four	separate	silver	keys	–	each	in	the	keeping	of	a	different	official	–
and	a	fifth	golden	key	that	was	hanging	from	a	chain	around	Humayun’s	neck.	Humayun	was	glad	that
before	first	marching	out	to	face	Sher	Shah	he	had	had	the	foresight	to	order	his	treasure	in	Delhi	to
be	 sent	 to	 Agra	 for	 safe	 keeping.	 With	 his	 own	 money	 and	 gems	 and	 what	 he	 had	 captured	 from

Bahadur	Shah,	he	should	have	more	than	enough	funds	to	recruit	and	equip	a	new	army	to	match	Sher
Shah’s.
At	the	very	end	of	the	line	would	come	further	ranks	of	cavalry	and	foot	soldiers,	including	some
of	 his	 best	 archers,	 so	 skilled	 they	 could	 fire	 forty	 arrows	 a	 minute.	 And	 strung	 out	 all	 around	 the
column	 and	 out	 of	 sight	 for	 much	 of	 the	 time	 would	 be	 Ahmed	 Khan’s	 scouts,	 ever	 watchful	 for
trouble.
Two	hours	later,	mounted	on	the	long-legged,	muscular	bay	stallion	that	had	carried	him	so	swiftly
back	to	his	capital	after	the	disaster	at	Kanauj,	Humayun	himself	rode	slowly	down	the	ramp	of	the
Agra	fort.	Beneath	his	jewelled	helmet,	his	eyes	looked	straight	ahead.	This	was	no	time	for	backward
glances	or	nostalgic	thoughts.	This	was	only	a	temporary	setback	and	soon	–	very	soon,	if	God	so
willed	 –	 he	 would	 return	 to	 claim	 what	 was	 his.	 Yet	 there	 was	 still	 one	 thing	 he	 must	 do	 before
departing.	Riding	down	to	the	riverbank,	he	dismounted	and	boarded	the	small	boat	waiting	to	carry
him	across	the	Jumna	to	Maham’s	grave.	Arrived	at	the	simple	white	marble	slab,	he	knelt	and	kissed
it.	‘Sher	Shah	is	a	man	of	our	own	faith,’	he	whispered.	‘He	will	not	violate	your	grave	and	one	day	I
will	return	to	you.	Forgive	me,	Mother,	that	I	cannot	observe	the	forty	days	of	mourning,	but	the	fate
of	our	dynasty	is	in	the	balance	and	I	must	strain	every	nerve	and	sinew	to	defend	it	.	.	.	’

The	 rains	 that	 had	 fallen	 almost	 daily	 since	 they	 had	 left	 Agra	 seemed	 to	 be	 easing	 and	 –	 just	 as
Humayun	had	hoped	–	though	Sher	Shah	had	seized	Agra,	he	had	not	pursued	him	further.	According
to	Humayun’s	spies,	the	khutba	had	been	read	in	Sher	Shah’s	name	in	the	mosque	of	the	Agra	fort,
proclaiming	 him	 once	 more	 Padishah	 of	 Hindustan,	 and	 he	 was	 now	 holding	 court	 in	 the	 pillared
audience	chamber.	Well,	let	the	usurper	enjoy	his	moment	of	glory	–	it	would	be	brief.
He	 and	 his	 column	 were	 making	 good	 progress,	 Humayun	 reflected	 –	 usually	 twelve	 or	 thirteen
miles	a	day,	perhaps	more,	as	they	travelled	northwest	over	the	flat,	featureless	terrain.	If	they	could
continue	 at	 this	 pace	 they	 should	 reach	 Lahore	 within	 a	 month.	 So	 far	 they	 had	 suffered	 no	 serious
attacks.	As	the	Moghul	column	passed	by	villages,	the	people	seemed	afraid	to	come	close,	watching
the	passing	ranks	of	soldiers	and	wagons	from	the	safety	of	the	sodden	fields	or	peeping	from	their
thatched,	mud-brick	houses.All	that	moved	were	hollow-ribbed	dogs	and	scrawny,	yellow-feathered
chickens.
There	had	been	only	one	attack	on	his	column.	One	evening	in	a	rapidly	falling	dusk	made	darker
by	a	veil	of	drizzle,	a	band	of	dacoits	had	fallen	on	a	baggage	cart	carrying	spare	tents	and	cooking
equipment	 that	 had	 become	 bogged	 down	 and	 separated	 from	 the	 main	 column.	 It	 had	 been	 some
hours	 before	 its	 absence	 had	 been	 spotted	 and	 Ahmed	 Khan	 sent	 scouts	 to	 search	 for	 it.	 They	 had
found	the	drivers’	sodden	bodies	lying	with	arrows	in	their	backs	and	the	wagon	gone.	But	even	in	the
darkness,	the	thieves	and	the	stolen	wagon	had	not	been	hard	to	track.	By	the	time	the	first	fires	of	the
day	 were	 flickering	 into	 life,	 Ahmed	 Khan’s	 men	 had	 brought	 the	 dacoits,	 trussed	 like	 fowl	 for
market,	into	the	camp.	Humayun	had	immediately	ordered	their	heads	to	be	cut	off	and	cemented	into
a	pyramid	of	stones	as	a	sign	that	he	would	permit	no	lawlessness	among	his	subjects.
Neither	would	he	tolerate	it	amongst	his	troops.	Though	not	of	his	blood,	these	Hindustanis	were
his	people	–	his	subjects	–	and	he	would	not	have	it	said	that	he	allowed	his	men	to	pillage	them	at
will.	He’d	given	strict	orders	that	there	was	to	be	no	looting	and	had	already	had	six	soldiers	flogged,

spread-eagled	across	wooden	frames	in	front	of	their	comrades,	for	stealing	a	sheep	and	a	seventh
executed	for	raping	a	village	girl.
All	 the	 same,	 as	 he	 passed	 the	 village	 temples	 with	 their	 carved	 stone	 bulls	 garlanded	 with
marigolds,	and	their	statues	of	bizarre	gods	–	some	multi-armed,	some	part	man,	part	elephant	–	he
couldn’t	help	wondering	whether	he’d	ever	understand	fully	the	land	to	which	fate	and	a	hunger	for
empire	 had	 brought	 the	 Moghuls.	 His	 own	 god	 was	 single,	 indivisible	 and	 all-powerful	 and	 it	 was
sacrilege	 to	 attempt	 to	 create	 his	 image.	 The	 Hindu	 gods	 seemed	 legion	 and	 in	 their	 voluptuous
bodies	and	sinuous	limbs	more	suggestive	of	earthly	delight	than	eternal	salvation.
Sometimes	 as	 he	 rode,	 Humayun	 discussed	 his	 thoughts	 with	 Khanzada	 and	 Gulbadan,	 speaking
with	them	through	the	pale	pink	silk	that	covered	their	swaying	howdah,	fastened	with	gold	chains	to
the	 back	 of	 one	 of	 his	 best	 elephants.	 The	 practical	 Khanzada	 didn’t	 share	 his	 curiosity	 about	 the
religious	 practices	 of	 his	 Hindu	 subjects	 –	 why	 they	 venerated	 stone	 yoni	 and	 lingams	 –
representations	of	the	female	and	male	sexual	organs	–	why	their	priests	daubed	their	foreheads	with
ashes	and	why	they	wore	a	long	cotton	thread	suspended	over	their	right	shoulder.
Yet	Gulbadan	seemed	not	only	fascinated	by	these	infidel	practices	but	also	knowledgeable	about
them.	Of	course,	Humayun	reminded	himself,	she’d	been	just	a	very	young	child	when	brought	from
Kabul	to	Babur ’s	capital	of	Agra.	She’d	grown	up	in	Hindustan	and	had	few	if	any	memories	of	the
Moghuls’	 mountainous	 homelands	 beyond	 the	 Khyber	 Pass.	 Among	 her	 nurses	 would	 have	 been
Hindustani	women	–	ayahs	they	called	them	–	who	would	have	explained	their	religious	rituals	to	her.
When	times	were	calmer,	he	might	do	well	to	spend	time	with	Gulbadan,	to	try	to	understand	more
about	his	subjects.

Humayun’s	column	continued	to	pass	on	through	a	seemingly	quiescent	land	until	Lahore	at	last	rose
before	 them.	 Though	 the	 city	 had	 no	 surrounding	 walls	 to	 protect	 it,	 the	 ancient	 royal	 palace,	 built
centuries	 ago	 by	 Hindu	 rulers	 in	 the	 heart	 of	 the	 city,	 looked	 solid	 and	 strong	 as	 Humayun
dismounted	in	front	of	it.	Still	better	was	the	news	that	his	half-brothers	had	already	arrived	and	were
awaiting	 him	 within.	 In	 his	 darker	 moments	 he’d	 wondered	 whether	 they	 would	 obey	 his	 order	 but
they	had	.	.	.	even	Kamran.
He	was	surprised	how	eager	he	felt	to	be	with	them.What	would	they	be	like	now?	He’d	not	seen
any	of	them	since	that	bleak	time	after	Babur ’s	death	when	they	had	plotted	against	him.	Now,	more
than	ever,	he	was	glad	he’d	been	merciful	to	them	–	not	only	because	with	his	dying	breaths	Babur
had	 asked	 him	 to	 show	 them	 compassion	 but	 because	 he	 needed	 his	 half-brothers	 and	 they	 surely
needed	him.	Sher	Shah	was	a	threat	to	them	all	as	Moghul	princes.	If	Babur ’s	sons	could	unite,	they
could	drive	Sher	Shah	back	into	the	festering	marshes	of	Bengal	whence	he’d	come.	But	more	than
that,	it	might	also	be	an	opportunity	for	them	to	start	again,	re-forging	the	bonds	not	only	of	blood
but	of	affection	that	should	never	have	been	broken.	Was	it	foolish	to	hope	that	they	also	might	wish
to	heal	the	wounds	of	the	past?
As	 soon	 as	 it	 was	 growing	 light	 next	 morning,	 Humayun	 summoned	 his	 half-brothers	 to	 his
apartments.	Kasim,	Zahid	Beg	and	a	weary-looking	Baisanghar	were	present	as	Kamran,	Askari	and
Hindal	entered	and	Humayun	embraced	them	one	by	one,	appraising	each	with	a	frank	curiosity	that
matched	their	own	as	they	stared	back	at	him.	When	he’d	last	seen	them	over	six	years	ago,	Askari

and	Hindal	had	been	youths	and	Kamran,	just	five	months	younger	than	himself,	little	more.	Now	they
were	all	men.
Kamran’s	eyes	–	that	vivid	green	just	like	their	father ’s	–	flickered	above	a	nose	that	was	still	hawklike,	 indeed	 even	 more	 so.	 It	 had	 clearly	 been	 broken	 –	 perhaps	 in	 a	 fall	 from	 his	 horse	 or	 in	 a
skirmish	–	and	the	hakims	had	failed	to	set	it	properly.	That	was	not	the	only	change	–	Kamran	had
broadened	 out.	 His	 sinewy	 shoulders	 and	 thick	 biceps	 bulged	 beneath	 his	 yellow	 tunic.	 Askari	 had
altered	 less.	 Though	 his	 face	 looked	 longer	 and	 narrower	 than	 Humayun	 remembered	 and	 he	 now
wore	a	clipped	black	beard,	he	was	still	slight.	He	was	also	at	least	half	a	head	shorter	than	Humayun
or	Kamran.	As	for	Hindal,	Humayun	would	not	have	recognised	him	at	all.	Dildar ’s	son	–	Gulbadan’s
brother	 –	 had	 grown	 so	 much.	 Taller	 than	 any	 of	 his	 brothers	 by	 at	 least	 four	 inches	 and	 thickly
muscled,	he	looked	far	older	than	his	eighteen	years,	an	impression	reinforced	by	a	scar	across	his
right	 eyebrow	 beneath	 his	 unruly	 brown	 hair	 and	 by	 his	 deep,	 resonating	 voice	 as	 he	 greeted
Humayun.
Politenesses	 over,	 Humayun	 motioned	 his	 half-brothers	 to	 sit	 in	 a	 semicircle	 around	 him	 with
Kasim,	Baisanghar	and	Zahid	Beg	and	got	immediately	to	the	point.	‘I	am	glad	to	see	you.	It	has	been
a	long	time	since	we	were	all	together.	You	know	why	I	summoned	you	here.	This	is	a	council	of	war
and	the	fate	of	every	one	of	us	–	of	our	entire	dynasty	–	rests	on	the	results.	In	the	past	we	have	had
our	differences	but	we	are	all	four	the	sons	of	Babur.	Timur ’s	blood	runs	in	all	our	veins	and	we	must
unite	 against	 the	 danger	 that	 presses	 in	 around	 us.	 As	 you	 know,	 Sher	 Shah	 at	 the	 head	 of	 three
hundred	thousand	men	has	occupied	Agra,	our	capital	.	.	.	’
‘It	is	regrettable	that	your	campaigns	against	him	did	not	prosper,’	Kamran	said	quietly.	‘It	seems
that	for	once	your	stars	misled	you.’
Humayun	 flushed,	 his	 hopes	 of	 harmony	 shattering	 as	 Kamran	 spoke.	 ‘I	 shed	 my	 own	 blood
fighting	Sher	Shah’s	armies	and	many	good	men	died	–	men	like	Baba	Yasaval.	Had	you	sent	the	help
I	requested,	I	could	have	defeated	Sher	Shah,	and	those	brave	warriors	who	fell	around	me	might	still
be	living	.	.	.	’
‘I	offered	to	come	at	the	head	of	all	my	troops	but	you	declined	.	.	.	’
‘Because	I	did	not	wish	to	see	your	province	left	undefended.’
‘But	I	warned	you	against	riding	so	far	east	to	confront	Sher	Shah	–	I	advised	you	to	prepare	for	a
long	 siege	 in	 either	 Agra	 or	 Delhi.	 Secure	 within	 the	 walls	 and	 well	 stocked	 with	 provisions,	 you
could	have	bled	Sher	Shah	dry	and	used	some	of	your	other	forces	to	attack	him	from	the	rear.	But	as
always	you	did	not	heed	my	advice	.	.	.	’	Kamran	persisted	with	what	seemed	to	Humayun	a	half-sneer
on	his	face.
‘And	as	always	your	loyalty	to	me	is	dubious	.	.	.	like	sand	in	the	hourglass	it	is	already	trickling
away	 .	 .	 .	 I	 see	 it	 in	 your	 treacherous	 eyes	 .	 .	 .	 ’	 Humayun	 was	 on	 his	 feet.	 In	 their	 boyhood	 he	 had
always	been	the	better	fighter	and	wrestler.	He’d	thrashed	Kamran	a	thousand	times	and	would	do	so
again	 .	 .	 .	 Kamran	 too	 had	 leaped	 up,	 his	 hand	 reaching	 for	 the	 jewelled	 dagger	 in	 his	 dark	 purple
sash.
‘Majesties	.	.	.	’	Baisanghar ’s	calm	voice	brought	both	of	them	to	their	senses.	Humayun	felt	shame
that	 he	 had	 allowed	 Kamran	 to	 provoke	 him.	 They	 were	 not	 boys	 sparring	 in	 Kabul	 but	 Moghul
princes	facing	a	deadly	and	common	danger.	Kamran	too	seemed	to	have	regretted	his	reaction.	His
hand	moved	away	from	his	sash	and,	eyes	lowered,	he	sat	down	again.	Askari	and	Hindal	were	also
looking	 down,	 as	 if	 making	 clear	 that	 they	 wanted	 no	 part	 in	 this	 spat	 between	 Babur ’s	 two	 eldest
sons.
‘As	always,	Baisanghar,	you	are	the	voice	of	reason.’	Humayun	too	seated	himself	again.‘What	is

past	is	past.What	matters	is	the	future.	Our	father	struggled	nearly	his	whole	life	–	from	the	time	he
was	 twelve	 years	 old	 –	 to	 found	 an	 empire.	 God	 guided	 him	 to	 new	 lands,	 far	 from	 our	 ancestral
home,	and	it	is	our	sacred	trust	not	to	lose	what	he	fought	for.	That	is	why	I	summoned	you	here	–	so
that	we	four	could	decide	how	to	fulfil	that	trust	.	.	.	And	because	our	greatest	strength,	our	greatest
safety,	lies	in	unity.’
His	 half-brothers	 nodded	 and	 Humayun	 began	 to	 breathe	 more	 easily.	 ‘Zahid	 Beg,	 outline	 our
military	thinking	to	my	brothers.	I	would	welcome	their	opinion.’
As	Humayun	sat	back	against	a	large	brocade	cushion,	his	master-of-horse	began	to	summarise	the
strategy	that	Humayun	with	his	advice	and	that	of	Baisanghar	had	drawn	up.
‘Majesties,’	 Zahid	 Beg	 began,	 bony	 face	 grave,	 ‘we	 cannot	 know	 Sher	 Shah’s	 intentions	 but	 at
present	 he	 seems	 occupied	 in	 consolidating	 his	 position	 –	 he	 has	 brought	 his	 armies	 a	 long	 way
westward	from	Bengal	so	he	needs	to	secure	more	supplies.	Also,	he	risks	rebellion	to	his	rear	from
the	lawless	tribes	who	inhabit	the	swamps	of	the	Ganges	Delta.	That	means	that	we	have	at	least	a	little
time	before	he	feels	secure	enough	to	pursue	us	here	from	Agra	.	.	.	if	indeed	he	means	to,	and	that	is
not	 certain.	 We	 must	 use	 that	 time	 to	 recruit.	 We’ve	 already	 sent	 to	 the	 governor	 of	 Kabul	 for
reinforcements.	 Once	 they	 arrive,	 our	 position	 will	 be	 immeasurably	 stronger	 and	 our	 options
greater.’
‘Can	 we	 pay	 these	 recruits?’	 Askari	 asked,	 his	 small	 black	 eyes	 intent.	 ‘Or	 do	 we	 expect	 them	 to
fight	for	us	on	the	promise	of	booty	alone?’
‘We	have	funds	–	from	the	imperial	treasuries	at	Agra	but	also	Delhi,’	Kasim	replied.
‘And	till	they	arrive	.	.	.	?’	asked	Kamran.
‘We	will	use	the	time	to	provision	and	reinforce	Lahore,’	said	Humayun.	‘It	is	unfortunate	the	city
is	 unwalled,	 but	 we	 are	 protected	 to	 the	 north	 by	 the	 Ravi	 river	 and	 can	 dig	 defensive	 trenches	 and
position	 our	 cannon	 and	 musketeers	 to	 west,	 south	 and	 east.	 The	 palace	 itself	 is	 strongly	 built.	 We
could	defend	it	for	some	time	while	awaiting	fresh	forces.’
Kamran’s	green	eyes	flickered	but	he	said	no	more.
‘How	 many	 troops	 have	 you	 brought	 with	 you,	 Majesties?’	 Kasim	 opened	 the	 mulberry-wood
covers	 of	 the	 book	 in	 which	 for	 as	 long	 as	 Humayun	 could	 remember	 his	 vizier	 had	 kept	 notes	 of
important	matters.	Unstoppering	the	little	jade	ink-bottle	hanging	from	a	chain	around	his	neck	and
dipping	in	his	quill,	Kasim	waited.
‘I	 have	 brought	 five	 thousand	 horsemen,	 including	 one	 thousand	 mounted	 archers,’	 said	 Askari,
‘and	also	five	hundred	spare	horses.’
‘My	force	numbers	about	three	thousand	cavalry	and	five	hundred	foot	soldiers,’	said	Hindal.	‘All
good	men.’
They	all	looked	at	Kamran.	‘I	came	with	only	two	thousand	cavalry.	After	all,	you	warned	me	some
weeks	 ago	 against	 leaving	 my	 province	 undefended	 in	 case	 of	 attack	 .	 .	 .	 ’	 His	 tone	 was	 almost	 too
much	for	Humayun	–	Kamran’s	province	was	the	largest	and	richest	of	all	and	the	farthest	from	Sher
Shah’s	 armies	 and	 he	 could	 easily	 have	 spared	 many	 more	 than	 two	 thousand	 without	 placing	 it	 in
jeopardy,	but	Humayun	forced	himself	to	swallow	his	anger.	For	a	moment	the	only	sound	was	the
scratching	of	Kasim’s	pen,	then	the	vizier	looked	up.	‘So,	Majesties,	with	the	addition	of	these	extra
men,	that	brings	our	strength	up	to	around	ninety	thousand.’
‘We	 must	 do	 everything	 we	 can	 to	 keep	 them	 here	 –	 I	 don’t	 want	 them	 disappearing	 home	 .	 .	 .	 ’
Humayun	said.
‘The	way	to	avoid	that	is	by	promising	them	action	and	booty	soon.	Given	that	the	women	and	the
treasure	 are	 safe	 here	 in	 Lahore,	 we	 should	 march	 out	 now	 against	 Sher	 Shah	 –	 surprise	 him	 .	 .	 .	 ’

Kamran	replied.
‘Yes,’	agreed	Askari	eagerly,	‘Kamran	is	right.	Wouldn’t	that	be	best?’
‘It	would	be	reckless,’	Humayun	replied.	‘You	forget	how	vastly	he	outnumbers	us.	To	stand	any
chance	of	a	decisive	victory	we	would	need	to	take	our	artillery.	That	would	not	only	slow	us	down
but	give	time	for	news	of	our	approach	to	reach	him.	I	do	not	understand	you,	Kamran.You	criticised
me	for	riding	to	confront	Sher	Shah	instead	of	allowing	him	to	besiege	me	in	Agra	or	Delhi	but	now
when	I	suggest	fortifying	Lahore	against	him,	you	urge	me	to	ride	to	battle	against	him	.	.	.	’
‘The	 circumstances	 are	 different.	 But	 plainly	 you	 don’t	 want	 our	 views.	 You	 just	 want	 to	 tell	 us
yours,’	Kamran	said	with	a	sulky	expression.	‘I	have	nothing	further	to	suggest.’
Catching	his	grandfather ’s	warning	look,	Humayun	this	time	resisted	the	temptation	to	let	Kamran
provoke	him.	Instead,	he	turned	to	Askari	and	Hindal.	‘Kamran	is	mistaken.	I	do	want	to	know	your
thoughts.’	They	remained	silent,	perhaps	inhibited	by	the	tension	between	their	elder	brothers.	Regret
mingled	with	frustration	seeped	through	Humayun.	It	shouldn’t	be	like	this.	He	was	ready	to	forget	the
past	but	it	didn’t	seem	his	half-brothers,	his	flesh	and	blood,	were	as	willing.
However,	 after	 a	 moment,	 Hindal	 spoke.	 ‘Zahid	 Beg	 spoke	 of	 options	 once	 the	 reinforcements
from	Kabul	reach	us.	What	are	they?’
Humayun	 answered.	 ‘I	 am	 expecting	 at	 least	 fifty	 thousand	 men.	 I	 have	 sent	 orders	 that	 if	 we	 are
already	under	siege	here	in	Lahore,	they	are	to	attack	the	rear	of	the	besieging	force.	But	if	they	reach
us	before	Sher	Shah	has	advanced	far	from	Agra	–	as	I	hope	–	we	will	have	sufficient	men	to	be	able
to	 attack	 Sher	 Shah’s	 advancing	 army	 on	 the	 flanks.	 He	 will	 have	 the	 advantage	 of	 numbers	 but	 we
will	have	those	of	speed	and	horsemanship	that	have	always	served	us	well	against	our	enemies.	So
you	see,	Kamran,	I	am	ready	to	take	the	initiative	against	Sher	Shah	–	only	we	can’t	do	it	yet	.	.	.	’
Kamran	shrugged	and	silence	fell	again.	Humayun	rose.	‘Let’s	talk	again	when	we’ve	more	news
of	 Sher	 Shah’s	 intentions	 and	 of	 the	 progress	 of	 our	 reinforcements	 from	 Kabul.	 But	 tonight	 let’s
feast	 –	 it	 is	 a	 long	 time	 since	 we	 were	 all	 together.	 We	 must	 show	 the	 world	 that	 despite	 present
adversities	Babur ’s	sons	are	united.’
Hurrying	 down	 the	 corridor	 leading	 to	 his	 apartments,	 Humayun	 passed	 the	 doors	 leading	 to	 the
women’s	 quarters.	 Somewhere	 within	 would	 be	 Gulrukh	 whom	 he	 had	 been	 told	 had	 travelled	 to
Lahore	with	Kamran.	Predictably	it	was	with	her	elder,	more	ambitious	son	that	she	had	chosen	to	live
after	he	himself	had	banished	her	from	his	court.	Would	she	be	seeking	to	influence	her	sons	and	if
so,	how?	It	would	be	a	good	opportunity.	Humayun	wondered	whether	he	had	been	wise	to	bring	his
half-brothers	together	again.	Maybe	it	was	foolish	to	think	there	could	ever	be	real	trust,	real	unity
between	the	four	of	them	–	ambition,	rivalry,	would	always	get	in	the	way.	And	could	he	blame	them?
In	their	place	wouldn’t	he	feel	resentment	against	the	brother	who	had	inherited	everything?	He	would
have	to	have	all	of	them	–	and	Kamran	in	particular	–	closely	watched	and	at	any	sign	of	disloyalty	he
would	act.	With	enemies	at	the	gates	he	could	not	tolerate	an	enemy	within.
Suddenly	 Humayun	 decided	 to	 visit	 Salima.	 Her	 warm,	 fervent	 embraces	 would	 banish	 troubled
thoughts	as	he	lost	himself	in	physical	pleasure.	He	smiled	and	quickened	his	pace.

‘Majesty,	Sher	Shah’s	vanguard	is	on	the	move	from	Agra	towards	Lahore.’	Jauhar ’s	voice	cut	into
Humayun’s	 disturbed	 dreams.	 He	 struggled	 to	 wakefulness	 to	 see	 Jauhar ’s	 anxious	 face	 lit	 by	 the

flickering	light	of	the	candle	he	was	holding	in	his	right	hand.	‘Ahmed	Khan	begs	to	see	you	at	once.
He	would	not	even	wait	for	first	light.	One	of	his	scouts	is	with	him.	He	has	been	on	the	road	these
past	six	days	and	just	returned.’
Humayun	sat	up,	splashed	his	face	with	water	from	a	brass	bowl	on	a	wooden	stand	by	his	bed	and
wrapped	a	green	silk	robe	around	him.	A	few	minutes	later,	Ahmed	Khan	and	a	sweat-soaked	scout
swaying	with	fatigue	were	before	him.
‘You	are	certain	Sher	Shah	is	on	the	move?’
‘Yes,	Majesty.	Hear	what	my	scout	says.’
The	scout	stepped	closer.	‘I	would	stake	my	life	on	it.	I	waited	until	from	what	I	saw	with	my	own
eyes	and	heard	with	my	own	ears	I	was	absolutely	sure	and	then	I	rode	for	Lahore,	pausing	only	to
change	horses	along	the	road.’
‘How	many	men?’
‘It’s	hard	to	estimate	but	by	the	great	dust	they	were	raising	on	the	road,	many	thousands	of	cavalry,
Majesty.’
‘And	Sher	Shah	himself?’
‘Still	in	Agra	according	to	what	I	heard.	But	soon	he	will	ride	out	too,	I	am	sure	of	it.	Before	I	left,
I	saw	a	great	baggage	train	being	assembled	on	the	riverbanks	beneath	the	Agra	fort	–	pack	mules,
oxen	and	camels	without	number	and	hundreds	of	elephants.	Sher	Shah’s	own	tents	with	their	purple
awnings	were	being	loaded	on	to	carts.’	The	scout’s	drawn,	filthy	face	relaxed	visibly	now	his	task
was	accomplished.
As	soon	as	he	was	alone,	Humayun	sat	cross-legged	at	his	low	table.	Any	further	discussions	with
his	brothers	would	be	fruitless.	Over	the	past	few	days,	Askari	and	Hindal	had	had	little	constructive
to	 suggest,	 preferring	 to	 listen	 to	 their	 elder	 brothers	 spar.	 Kamran	 had	 continued	 to	 argue	 for
confronting	Sher	Shah	and	Humayun	to	insist	that	without	many	more	men	such	a	strategy	would	fail,
reminding	 Kamran	 he’d	 already	 fought	 and	 lost	 two	 great	 battles	 against	 Sher	 Shah.	 Since	 then	 his
enemy	had	grown	stronger	while	he	had	grown	weaker.	This	was	not	the	time	to	seek	another	head-on
confrontation.
And	 all	 the	 while,	 something	 he	 had	 once	 read	 in	 his	 father ’s	 memoirs	 had	 kept	 returning	 to
Humayun’s	mind.	If	you	cannot	defeat	your	enemy	by	force	of	arms,	do	not	despair.	Find	other	ways.	A
sharp,	 well-oiled	 double-bladed	 axe	 is	 a	 fine	 weapon	 but	 so	 is	 a	 finely	 honed	 mind	 that	 can	 find	 a
subtler	path	to	victory	.	.	.
After	thinking	for	a	while,	Humayun	began	to	write.	‘Sher	Shah,	you	seek	to	take	Hindustan	from
me	though	it	is	mine	by	virtue	of	my	blood	descent	from	Timur.	Meet	me	in	single	combat	and	let	us
settle	this	dispute	for	ever.	But	if	you	will	not	fight	me,	let	us	at	least	agree	a	truce	to	prevent	further
bloodshed	while	we	seek	other	ways	to	settle	our	differences.’
Taking	 a	 stick	 of	 dark	 red	 sealing	 wax,	 Humayun	 stuck	 the	 end	 into	 the	 flame	 of	 a	 candle	 and
watched	the	wax	soften,	then	begin	to	drip	ruby	droplets	like	beads	of	blood.	Taking	the	stick	out	of
the	flame,	he	held	it	over	the	bottom	of	the	letter,	until	a	small	wax	pool	had	collected.	Then,	turning
his	right	hand	over,	he	pressed	Timur ’s	gold	ring	hard	into	the	wax	to	leave	a	perfect	impression	of	a
snarling	tiger.
An	hour	later,	Humayun	watched	two	of	Ahmed	Khan’s	men	gallop	out	of	Lahore	to	seek	out	Sher
Shah	 and	 deliver	 his	 letter.	 Sher	 Shah	 would	 never	 agree	 to	 personal	 combat	 –	 only	 a	 fool	 would
accept	such	a	challenge	–	but	the	idea	of	a	truce	might	tempt	him.	Stories	–	admittedly	not	much	more
than	 rumours	 –	 brought	 by	 travelling	 merchants	 suggested	 discord	 between	 some	 of	 Sher	 Shah’s
commanders.	If	there	was	even	a	speck	of	truth	in	them,	Sher	Shah	might	welcome	a	pause	to	help

him	re-establish	his	authority.	If	so,	it	would	buy	Humayun	a	little	more	time.	There	was	still	no	sign
of	 the	 troops	 he	 had	 summoned	 from	 Kabul	 and	 probably	 wouldn’t	 be	 for	 at	 least	 several	 more
weeks.	Every	day	he	could	delay	Sher	Shah	would	help	.	.	.
Seven	days	later	–	an	ominous	sign	of	how	close	Sher	Shah	now	was	to	Lahore	–	Humayun	had	his
answer.	It	was	Kasim	who	brought	it	to	him	in	his	apartments.	Strangely	there	were	two	letters	–	one
in	 Sher	 Shah’s	 bold,	 ungraceful	 hand	 and	 bearing	 his	 seal	 and	 the	 other	 rolled	 up	 in	 a	 piece	 of
bamboo	 that	 –	 according	 to	 what	 the	 scouts	 had	 told	 Kasim	 –	 Sher	 Shah	 had	 insisted	 must	 also	 be
delivered	to	Humayun.
Humayun	read	Sher	Shah’s	letter	first.	I	have	conquered	Hindustan.	Why	should	I	fight	you	for	what
is	already	mine?	I	will	leave	you	Kabul	–	go	there.	But	there	was	more:	Why	expect	to	keep	an	empire
when	you	cannot	even	command	your	own	family’s	loyalty?	Your	brother	Kamran	is	willing	to	betray
you.	But	I	want	nothing	to	do	with	any	of	you	Moghuls	except	to	see	your	heads	roll	in	the	dust	where
they	belong.	I	have	written	to	your	brother	rejecting	his	offer	–	just	as	I	reject	yours	–	and	telling	him	I
would	inform	you	of	his	treachery.
Humayun	took	the	bamboo	tube	and	pulled	from	it	a	piece	of	yellow	parchment.	Unrolling	it,	he
immediately	recognised	Kamran’s	spiky	writing.	It	was	his	letter	to	Sher	Shah.	‘“My	brother	denied
me	my	birthright,”’	he	read	aloud	in	a	voice	trembling	with	anger.	‘“If	you,	Sher	Shah,	will	leave	me
the	 Punjab	 and	 the	 Moghul	 lands	 to	 the	 north	 including	 Kabul	 to	 rule	 as	 my	 own,	 I	 will	 deliver
Humayun	to	you	or	–	if	you	prefer	–	slay	him	with	my	own	hand,	I	swear	it.”’
Kasim	picked	up	Kamran’s	letter	from	the	floor	where	Humayun	had	let	it	fall	and	reread	it,	face
creasing	in	shock	as	he	took	in	Kamran’s	arrogant,	murderous	words.	Humayun	himself	strode	to	the
doors	and	flinging	them	open	shouted,	‘Guards,	bring	my	brother	Kamran	to	me	immediately.	If	he
resists,	overpower	and	bind	him.’	He	had	suspected	his	brothers	might	intrigue	against	him	but	never
that	one	of	them	would	be	so	lost	to	what	he	owed	to	the	dynasty	to	offer	to	betray	him	to	an	outsider.
Humayun	paced	his	chamber,	watched	by	a	silent	and	anxious	Kasim,	until	at	last	one	of	the	guards
returned.
‘Majesty,	we	cannot	find	him.We	went	first	to	his	apartments	but	he	was	not	there.	Then	we	searched
the	rest	of	the	fort	–	we	even	sent	into	the	women’s	apartments	to	see	whether	he	might	be	with	his
mother,	Her	Highness	Gulrukh,	but	she	was	not	there	either	.	.	.	’
Humayun	and	Kasim	exchanged	glances.	‘Send	me	the	officer	in	charge	of	guarding	the	main	gate
–	quickly,	man!’
A	few	minutes	later	a	nervous-looking	officer	was	ushered	before	Humayun.
‘Have	you	seen	any	of	my	brothers	today?’
‘Yes,	Majesty.	This	morning	Prince	Kamran	and	Prince	Askari	went	out	riding.	They	have	not	yet
returned	.	.	.	’
‘And	their	mother	Gulrukh	and	her	women?’
‘They	too	left	the	palace	in	a	litter.	The	begam	said	she	wished	to	call	on	her	cousin,	the	wife	of	the
chief	treasurer	of	Lahore,	in	her	palace	in	the	north	of	the	city.’
Humayun	 swore.	 Doubtless	 she	 was	 already	 with	 her	 sons	 and	 their	 troops	 and	 they	 were	 all
hurrying	to	get	beyond	his	reach.	The	temptation	to	ride	in	pursuit	was	almost	overwhelming	but	that
was	exactly	what	Sher	Shah	would	hope	he	would	do.	His	enemy	had	played	his	hand	well,	on	the	one
hand	giving	Humayun	evidence	of	his	brother ’s	duplicity	and	on	the	other	giving	Kamran	reason	to
fly.	 But	 he	 would	 not	 fall	 into	 the	 trap	 so	 artfully	 set	 for	 him	 by	 neglecting	 Sher	 Shah’s	 threat	 and
immediately	pursuing	Kamran	and	Askari	to	pit	brother	against	brother	in	battle.
Revenge	must	wait.

Chapter	10
Flight
Humayun	twisted	in	the	saddle.	It	was	thirty-six	hours	since	he	had	abandoned	Lahore	to	Sher	Shah.
Behind	 him	 streamed	 his	 remaining	 troops,	 only	 some	 fifteen	 thousand	 men	 –	 many	 had	 deserted.
Beyond	 them	 straggled	 for	 miles	 a	 desperate	 mass	 of	 humanity	 half	 choking	 in	 the	 hot	 dust,	 their
possessions	loaded	higgledy-piggledy	on	carts,	donkeys	and	mules.
Only	four	days	ago	a	group	of	travel-stained	merchants	–	so	terrified	that	they’d	abandoned	their
mule	trains	and	goods	along	the	way	–	had	galloped	into	Lahore,	yelling	to	whoever	would	listen	that
Sher	 Shah	 was	 threatening	 to	 put	 the	 city	 to	 the	 sword.	 A	 few	 hours	 later,	 a	 messenger	 had	 arrived
from	Sher	Shah	himself.	The	letter	he	was	carrying	was	simple	and	to	the	point.	Sher	Shah	was	indeed
threatening	 to	 destroy	 the	 city	 and	 slaughter	 its	 people	 –	 but	 only	 if	 Humayun	 refused	 to	 withdraw
from	it.
The	decision	to	quit	Lahore	just	as	he	had	been	forced	to	yield	Agra	was	a	terrible	humiliation.	But
Sher	Shah	commanded	vast	armies	that	–	if	the	reports	reaching	Humayun	were	true,	and	there	was	no
reason	 to	 doubt	 them	 –	 outnumbered	 his	 own	 forces	 by	 twenty	 to	 one,	 perhaps	 more.	 Despite	 the
trenches	 and	 fortifications	 he	 had	 ordered	 to	 be	 dug,	 without	 city	 walls	 to	 protect	 it	 any	 attempt	 to
defend	Lahore	against	such	an	overwhelming	force	was	doomed,	even	if	the	troops	he	had	summoned
from	Kabul	could	reach	him	in	time.
After	only	a	few	hours’	reflection,	Humayun	had	ordered	his	commanders	to	prepare	to	evacuate
Lahore.	 As	 the	 news	 had	 spread,	 the	 citizens	 had	 refused	 to	 believe	 that	 with	 Humayun	 gone,	 Sher
Shah	 would	 keep	 his	 word	 to	 spare	 them.	 There	 had	 been	 panic.	 From	 one	 of	 the	 citadel’s	 stone
towers,	Humayun	had	watched	people	pouring	from	their	houses,	clutching	cloth-wrapped	bundles	of
their	most	precious	belongings	and	gripping	the	hands	of	small,	screaming	children.	A	few	carried
old	people	on	their	backs.	Soon	the	narrow	streets	had	become	clogged	with	handcarts	and	wagons
drawn	by	stumbling	animals.	Under	the	pressure	of	fear	ordinary	citizens	had	lost	their	reason	and
become	a	crazed	and	callous	mob,	desperate	only	to	get	away	and	save	themselves.	Shops	had	been
looted	 and	 the	 weak	 and	 frail	 elbowed	 and	 pushed	 aside,	 some	 falling	 to	 be	 trampled	 and	 crushed
underfoot.	It	had	been	like	witnessing	the	end	of	the	world.
The	 panic	 and	 chaos	 had	 grown	 yet	 worse	 as	 the	 boom	 of	 massive	 explosions	 had	 begun	 to
reverberate	 in	 the	 citizens’	 ears,	 coming	 from	 the	 great	 parade	 ground	 near	 the	 palace	 where
Humayun	 had	 ordered	 the	 destruction	 of	 his	 largest	 bronze	 cannon,	 which	 would	 be	 too	 slow	 and
cumbersome	to	take	with	him.	Teams	of	straining	oxen	had	dragged	the	guns	out	on	to	open	ground
where	 Humayun’s	 gunners,	 their	 naked	 torsos	 dripping	 with	 sweat,	 had	 hastily	 stuffed	 their	 barrels
with	powder	and	–	after	fixing	long	cotton	fuses	–	ignited	it,	sending	fragments	of	hot,	twisted	metal
into	the	air.
Snatching	his	thoughts	back	to	the	present,	Humayun	glanced	to	his	left	at	the	powerful	figure	of
Hindal	riding	on	a	great	cream-coloured	stallion	at	the	head	of	his	own	small	entourage.	Immediately
on	 hearing	 of	 Sher	 Shah’s	 message,	 Hindal	 had	 sought	 Humayun	 out	 and	 sworn	 on	 their	 father ’s

name	 that	 he	 had	 known	 nothing	 of	 Kamran’s	 and	 Askari’s	 defection.	 Since	 childhood	 Hindal	 had
never	 been	 good	 at	 concealing	 his	 emotions	 and	 seeing	 his	 half-brother ’s	 shocked	 face	 and
incredulity	at	what	Kamran	and	Askari	had	done,	Humayun	had	believed	him.	Later,	calm	reflection
had	told	him	his	instincts	had	been	correct.	Otherwise,	why	would	Hindal	have	remained	in	Lahore
and	risked	retribution?	Also,	Kamran	and	Askari	were	full	brothers.	Hindal	–	like	Humayun	himself	–
was	 only	 their	 half-brother,	 so	 the	 ties	 of	 blood	 and	 honour	 were	 weaker.	 As	 if	 sensing	 Humayun
watching	him,	Hindal	turned	his	head	and	gave	him	a	brief	smile.	It	was	good	that	Hindal	had	chosen
to	stay	with	him,	thought	Humayun.	Perhaps	amid	the	present	danger	to	their	dynasty	at	least	two	of
Babur ’s	sons	could	form	an	enduring	bond	and	draw	strength	from	it.
In	 the	 last	 desperate	 hours	 before	 abandoning	 Lahore	 to	 his	 rapidly	 advancing	 enemy,	 Humayun
had	embraced	Baisanghar	and	bidden	him	farewell,	perhaps	for	the	last	time.	It	had	been	hard	to	part
from	his	grandfather	and	even	harder	to	convince	the	old	man	he	must	go	north	with	a	detachment	of
troops	to	secure	Kabul	for	Humayun.	Again	and	again	Humayun	had	had	to	argue	that	Kamran	and
Askari	 might	 take	 advantage	 of	 his	 plight	 to	 try	 to	 seize	 the	 kingdom,	 that	 he	 no	 longer	 had
confidence	 in	 his	 governor	 there	 who	 had	 been	 so	 tardy	 in	 sending	 reinforcements	 and	 that
Baisanghar	was	one	of	the	very	few	he	could	trust	unreservedly	to	hold	it	for	him.
This	was	true,	but	there	was	another	reason	too	why	Humayun	wanted	his	grandfather	to	go	north,
although	 he	 could	 not	 have	 admitted	 it	 to	 Baisanghar.	 Though	 the	 warrior	 spirit	 still	 burned	 within
him	and	his	mind	was	clear,	he	was	old	–	eight	years	older	even	than	Kasim	–	and	losing	his	physical
stamina.	He’d	be	safer	as	well	as	more	useful	in	Kabul	rather	than	draining	his	small	remaining	stock
of	strength	accompanying	Humayun	on	the	long,	perhaps	dangerous,	journey	he	had	decided	on:	six
hundred	miles	southwest	down	the	Ravi	and	Indus	rivers	to	Sind.	The	Sultan	of	Sind,	Mirza	Husain,
was	 of	 Humayun’s	 blood	 –	 his	 mother	 was	 Babur ’s	 cousin	 –	 so	 he	 was	 honour	 bound	 to	 receive
Humayun.	 But	 would	 honour	 mean	 any	 more	 to	 Mirza	 Husain	 than	 it	 had	 to	 his	 half-brothers	 with
whom	his	ties	of	blood	were	so	much	closer?
Eventually,	Baisanghar	had	given	way,	persuaded	by	the	logic	of	Humayun’s	arguments.	However,
Khanzada	and	Gulbadan	had	been	harder	to	deal	with	and	this	time	it	was	Humayun	who	had	conceded
defeat.	 His	 aunt	 and	 half-sister	 had	 refused	 to	 accompany	 Baisanghar.	 ‘I	 have	 earned	 the	 right	 to
decide	 my	 own	 fate,’	 Khanzada	 had	 insisted	 quietly.	 ‘All	 the	 years	 I	 suffered	 in	 Shaibani	 Khan’s
haram,	I	told	myself	that	if	I	survived	never	again	would	I	lose	control	of	my	life,	my	destiny,	even	if
death	 was	 the	 only	 alternative.	 And	 the	 destiny	 I	 choose	 is	 to	 go	 with	 you,	 nephew.’	 Gulbadan	 had
remained	 silent	 throughout	 this	 speech	 but	 Humayun	 had	 noticed	 how	 tightly	 she	 was	 gripping
Khanzada’s	 hand	 and	 how	 determined	 was	 her	 expression.	 When	 Khanzada	 had	 finished	 speaking
Gulbadan	too	had	made	clear	her	wishes	to	accompany	Hindal	and	Humayun.
In	 his	 heart	 Humayun	 was	 glad	 they	 were	 with	 him.	 They	 were	 riding	 close	 by	 on	 sturdy	 brown
ponies,	 followed	 by	 their	 attendants	 and	 the	 wives	 and	 daughters	 of	 some	 of	 his	 and	 Hindal’s
commanders,	including	Zahid	Beg’s	wife,	also	mounted	on	ponies.	Speed	was	vital	and	this	was	no
time	for	more	decorous	modes	of	transport,	concealed	from	the	common	gaze	behind	the	curtains	of
litters	or	howdahs.	Nevertheless,	the	small	group	of	women	was	closely	guarded	by	the	most	trusted
of	 Humayun’s	 bodyguards	 and	 well	 hidden	 from	 prying	 eyes	 beneath	 voluminous	 garments,	 their
hair	 bound	 up	 and	 concealed	 by	 tight-fitting	 caps.	 Above	 the	 cotton	 face	 cloths	 that	 protected	 them
from	the	wind	and	the	choking	dust	only	their	eyes	were	visible.
There	should	have	been	a	further	pair	of	eyes	–	grey	ones	–	to	gladden	his	soul,	Humayun	thought.
Before	finally	quitting	the	Lahore	palace	he	had	paid	a	brief	visit	to	the	newly	dug	grave	in	the	garden
where	Salima	had	been	buried	only	two	days	before.	She	too	would	have	wanted	to	go	with	him	–	he

was	sure	of	it	–	but	a	sudden	fever	contracted	just	as	news	came	of	Sher	Shah’s	ultimatum	and	with
chaos	rising	all	around	had	claimed	her	life	within	twenty-four	hours	of	its	onset.	In	the	last	minutes
of	her	sweating	delirium,	her	staring,	unfocused	eyes	had	not	recognised	him	or	seen	the	tears	in	his
eyes	as	he	held	her	small	hand	in	his	own	larger	one	and	watched	as	her	last	breaths	fled	from	her
body.	 He	 would	 miss	 her	 so	 much.	 Since	 he	 had	 abandoned	 Gulrukh’s	 opium-laced	 wine	 and	 even
more	 since	 his	 defeats	 at	 the	 hands	 of	 Sher	 Shah,	 Salima	 had	 become	 ever	 more	 important	 to	 him,
providing	 an	 all-consuming	 physical	 relief	 from	 his	 mental	 doubts	 and	 daily	 cares	 and
responsibilities.
But	there	was	no	time	now	for	grief	or	for	reflections	upon	the	fragility	of	human	existence.	All
the	 time	 as	 he	 rode	 Humayun	 kept	 returning	 to	 the	 same	 question.	 Had	 he	 done	 the	 right	 thing	 in
abandoning	Lahore?	The	answer,	though,	was	always	the	same.	Faced	with	an	imminent	bloodbath	–
the	massacre	of	so	many	thousands	of	innocent	citizens	–	he’d	had	no	choice	but	to	order	his	forces
to	retreat	across	the	broad	wooden	bridge	that	spanned	the	Ravi	river	north	of	the	city.	As	soon	as	his
men	were	safely	over,	he’d	had	the	bridge	destroyed	to	hinder	Sher	Shah’s	troops	from	pursuing	him.
The	camp	followers	had	had	to	cross	as	best	they	could,	scrambling	aboard	fishing	–	and	ferry-boats.
But	Sher	Shah	had	as	yet	made	no	attempt	to	pursue	Humayun	who,	after	a	day	and	a	half	almost
constantly	 in	 the	 saddle,	 was	 now	 forty	 miles	 clear	 of	 Lahore.	 With	 each	 passing	 mile	 and	 hour	 he
became	more	and	more	convinced	that	he	would	be	given	time	to	regroup.	It	was	also	good	that	those
cannon	he	had	been	able	to	bring	with	him	–	dragged	to	the	Ravi	river	by	bullocks	–	had	been	safely
loaded	on	to	rafts	to	be	floated	downriver	under	the	care	of	Humayun’s	gunnery	commander	and	his
men.	 Their	 orders	 were	 to	 wait	 for	 the	 rest	 of	 the	 army	 to	 catch	 up	 at	 Multan,	 two	 hundred	 miles
southwest	of	Lahore.	He	was	well	provided	with	muskets,	powder	and	shot	as	well	as	with	treasure	in
coin	and	gems	which	he	could	use	to	pay	his	forces	and	buy	provisions	for	them	as	they	journeyed	to
Sind.	Perhaps	things	were	not	as	bleak	as	they	seemed.
But	 gazing	 up	 into	 the	 bleached,	 cloud-streaked	 skies,	 Humayun	 saw	 two	 vultures,	 circling
doubtless	above	some	dead	or	dying	creature.	At	Panipat	–	just	before	the	Moghuls’	great	victory	–	he
had	seen	eagles	wheeling	above	the	battlefield.	From	noble	eagles	to	filthy,	ill-omened	devourers	of
carrion	.	.	.	Was	that	a	symbol	of	how	his	fortunes	had	declined?	Humayun	plucked	an	arrow	from	the
gilded	leather	case	hanging	across	his	back	and,	unstrapping	his	double-curved	bow	from	his	saddle,
sent	an	arrow	hissing	through	the	hot	air.	It	found	its	mark.	Swiftly	he	drew	another	arrow	but	as	he
looked	up,	eagerly	seeking	his	second	target,	all	he	saw	above	him	was	an	empty	sky.

‘Majesty,	 my	 scouts	 report	 a	 small	 band	 of	 riders	 still	 some	 three	 or	 four	 miles	 off	 but	 galloping
quickly	towards	us,’	Ahmed	Khan	said,	reining	in	his	horse.
‘God	willing,	it’s	the	messenger	I	sent	to	Mirza	Husain,	returning	with	an	escort.	But	just	in	case,
halt	 the	 column	 and	 order	 the	 men	 to	 take	 up	 defensive	 positions	 around	 its	 perimeter.	 Post	 extra
guards	around	the	women	and	the	treasure.’
‘Yes,	Majesty.’
With	luck,	the	arduous	six-week	trek	from	Multan,	where	he	had	rendezvoused	as	planned	with	his
gunners	and	cannon,	and	then	along	the	Indus	would	soon	be	over	and	he	could	plan	how	to	regain
the	 initiative	 against	 Sher	 Shah.	 Humayun	 strained	 his	 eyes	 towards	 the	 western	 horizon	 where	 the

great,	blood-red	sun	was	sinking	rapidly.	Soon,	he	could	make	out	a	cloud	of	dust	rising	from	among
the	spindly	trees	and	tumbled	rocks	ahead	and	then	the	horsemen	themselves	–	about	thirty	of	them	–
led	by	a	cavalryman	whose	steel	helmet	glinted	in	the	last	rays	of	sunlight.	As	the	horsemen	reined	in,
Humayun	 saw	 that	 the	 messenger	 he	 had	 despatched	 with	 letters	 to	 Mirza	 Husain	 nearly	 two	 weeks
ago	was	indeed	among	them.	The	leading	rider	removed	his	helmet,	dismounted	and	made	obeisance.
‘Greetings,	Majesty.	Mirza	Husain,	Sultan	of	Sind	welcomes	you	to	his	lands.	He	awaits	you	at	a
camp	just	ten	miles	from	here.	He	denied	himself	the	honour	of	greeting	you	in	person	because	he
wished	to	assure	himself	that	all	was	ready	for	your	reception.	I	–	the	captain	of	his	bodyguard	–	and
my	men	will	escort	you	there.’
Dusk	 had	 fallen	 by	 the	 time	 Humayun	 saw	 the	 orange	 light	 of	 camp	 fires	 through	 the	 dark
silhouettes	of	the	trees.	The	only	time	he	had	seen	Mirza	Husain	was	many	years	ago	when	the	sultan
had	come	to	Kabul	to	pay	his	respects	to	Babur	and	he’d	no	memory	of	what	he	looked	like.	The	tall,
straight-backed	man	waiting	in	the	centre	of	the	camp,	hand	on	breast	and	dressed	in	magnificent	red
robes	with	a	tightly	wound	golden	turban	on	his	head,	was	therefore	a	stranger	to	him.
‘Welcome,	Majesty.	Your	arrival	honours	my	kingdom.’
‘Your	hospitality	is	most	welcome,	cousin.	My	brother	and	I	thank	you.’
Mirza	Husain	was	a	good-looking	man	if	a	little	fleshy,	Humayun	thought	as	the	ritual	exchange	of
courtesies	continued.	Before	he	let	himself	run	to	fat	he	must	have	been	a	good	fighter.	He	recalled
Babur ’s	stories	of	how	Mirza	Husain	had	consolidated	and	enlarged	his	kingdom,	even	taking	land
from	 his	 neighbour	 to	 the	 south	 in	 Gujarat,	 Bahadur	 Shah.While	 Humayun	 had	 been	 fighting	 in
Gujarat,	Mirza	Husain	had	sent	messages	of	support	but	had	offered	no	troops.	Neither	had	Humayun
asked	 his	 cousin	 for	 any.	 Confident	 of	 victory,	 he’d	 had	 no	 wish	 to	 share	 Gujarat’s	 rich	 booty	 any
more	widely	than	he’d	needed	to.
‘Everything	 is	 ready	 for	 your	 reception,	 Majesty.	 Special	 quarters	 have	 been	 prepared	 for	 the
women,	 near	 your	 own,	 and	 rows	 of	 tents	 erected	 for	 your	 soldiers.	 Tonight	 you	 must	 rest.	 I	 have
ordered	food	to	be	brought	to	you.	Three	days	from	now,	when	we	reach	my	palace	at	Sarkar,	we	can
talk	of	former	times.’
And	 of	 future	 ones,	 Humayun	 thought	 to	 himself.	 He	 needed	 Mirza	 Husain’s	 help	 if	 he	 could	 be
persuaded	to	give	it.	But	of	course	the	courtesies	must	be	observed	.	.	.
That	evening,	lying	back	on	a	brocade-covered	bed	in	his	own	tent,	Humayun	felt	himself	begin	to
relax	for	the	first	time	since	leaving	Lahore.	He	had	brought	his	family	and	his	remaining	forces	to
safety.	God	willing,	soon	he	would	be	riding	to	battle	again.

Sixty	 hours	 later	 under	 a	 blazing	 sun,	 with	 Mirza	 Husain	 on	 one	 side	 and	 Hindal	 on	 the	 other,
Humayun	rode	into	the	fortress	palace	of	Sarkar,	set	within	thick	walls	on	a	high	rocky	promontory
overlooking	the	sea.	Above	the	gatehouse,	two	banners	fluttered	in	the	clear	air	–	the	scarlet	red	of
Sind	and	by	its	side	the	brilliant	green	of	the	Moghuls.	The	palace,	approached	up	a	short,	steep	ramp
leading	 up	 from	 the	 gatehouse,	 was	 a	 golden-stoned	 building	 constructed	 around	 three	 sides	 of	 a
courtyard.
Installed	in	opulent	apartments	covering	almost	the	entire	middle	floor	of	the	palace’s	west	wing,
Humayun	 summoned	 Hindal	 and	 Kasim.	 He	 wished	 to	 confer	 with	 them	 alone	 without	 the	 listening

ears	of	his	own	attendants,	apart	from	Jauhar	whom	he	trusted	with	his	life	and	who	was	standing	on
guard	by	the	door.
Humayun	gestured	Hindal	and	Kasim	to	be	seated.	The	vizier	lowered	himself	with	difficulty.	The
hardships	 of	 recent	 weeks	 had	 taken	 their	 toll.	 Kasim	 looked	 even	 thinner	 and	 more	 stooped	 than
before.	 Humayun	 waited	 while	 his	 old	 counsellor	 settled	 himself	 before	 speaking.	 ‘Though	 for
courtesy’s	 sake	 I’ve	 not	 yet	 said	 anything,	 Mirza	 Husain	 knows	 very	 well	 why	 I	 have	 come	 –	 that	 I
want	his	help	against	Sher	Shah.	Soon,	though,	I	must	raise	the	matter	and	wish	to	be	prepared.	Have
you	yet	managed	to	glean	anything	of	his	thoughts	or	intentions	from	those	around	him,	Kasim?’
‘I	may	have	learned	something	of	what	is	in	his	mind	.	.	.	’	Kasim	said	cautiously.	‘People	reveal
more	than	they	realise	if	you	are	a	good	listener	.	.	.	I’ve	been	told	that	when	Mirza	Husain	first	read
your	letter	asking	him	to	receive	you,	he	was	thrown	into	great	consternation.	He	has	no	desire	for
his	kingdom	with	its	prosperous	merchants	and	harbours	crammed	with	cargo	dhows	from	Arabia	to
be	drawn	into	a	conflict.	He	even	fears	you	mean	to	take	his	kingdom	from	him	.	.	.	’
‘Then	why	did	he	welcome	us	here?	He	could	have	made	excuses,’	asked	Hindal.
Humayun	grunted.	‘He	had	little	choice.	He	is	our	cousin	and	I	think	that	means	something	to	him.
Also,	despite	my	reverses	I	am	an	emperor	intending	to	recover	my	lands	and,	when	I	do,	well	placed
to	 reward	 him	 and	 to	 further	 his	 ambitions.	 Mirza	 Husain	 knows	 this.	 And	 unless	 he	 wished	 for	 an
open	breach	he	could	not	bar	his	doors	against	me.	But	whatever	is	in	his	heart	and	mind,	I	must	plan
our	next	steps.	Has	any	further	news	reached	us	of	Sher	Shah’s	movements	these	past	three	days?’
‘None,	Majesty,’	said	Kasim.	‘From	what	little	we	can	glean	from	travellers	and	others,	he	has	still
not	moved	beyond	Lahore.’
‘And	what	news	of	Kamran	and	Askari?’
‘No	 one	 knows	 where	 they	 are	 at	 present,	 Majesty.	 According	 to	 some	 rumours	 they	 have
withdrawn	 northwards	 up	 the	 Kabul	 river	 to	 Badakhshan	 –	 but	 as	 I	 say,	 Majesty,	 those	 are	 only
rumours	.	.	.	’
Humayun	 frowned.	 ‘Sometimes	 I	 wonder	 whether	 Kamran	 wasn’t	 playing	 an	 even	 deeper	 game
than	I	realised,	and	Sher	Shah	also.	What	if	the	whole	business	of	Kamran’s	offer	to	betray	me	and
Sher	Shah’s	rejection	of	it	was	a	subterfuge	by	the	pair	of	them	to	draw	me	out	of	Lahore	so	their
forces	could	fall	on	mine	and	destroy	them?’
‘It’s	possible,	Majesty,’	said	Kasim.	‘We	cannot	discount	it.’
‘I	 also	 keep	 wondering	 how	 much	 Askari	 knew	 of	 Kamran’s	 plans.	 Did	 they	 scheme	 together	 to
betray	me	to	Sher	Shah	or	did	Askari	flee	with	Kamran	because	he	thought	I	would	never	believe	he
hadn’t	been	implicated?’
This	time	Hindal	answered.	‘I’m	sure	Askari	did	know.	He	always	follows	where	Kamran	leads.	I
do	not	speak	from	malice	but	because	I	have	reason	to	know	–	I	was	once	the	same.’
‘I	suspect	you	are	right.	Unlike	Kamran,	Askari’s	weak	and	he	stands	in	awe	of	his	elder	brother,’
said	Humayun.	‘Consequently,	his	treachery	hurts	me	less.	In	my	boyhood	it	was	Kamran	–	almost	my
equal	in	age	–	that	I	played	and	hunted	and	sparred	with.Though	we	often	argued	–	sometimes	even
fought	 –	 for	 a	 while	 we	 were	 close	 .	 .	 .	 almost	 like	 full	 brothers.	 That	 he	 should	 desire	 my	 death
brings	me	almost	as	much	grief	as	anger	.	.	.	’
A	 knock	 on	 the	 door	 interrupted	 him	 and	 he	 fell	 silent	 as	 Jauhar	 swung	 the	 well-oiled	 rosewood
doors	 open	 to	 see	 who	 was	 there.	 Humayun	 heard	 low	 voices	 conversing	 outside,	 then	 Jauhar
reappeared.
‘Forgive	me,	Majesty,	but	Mirza	Husain	has	sent	his	vizier	with	a	message.’
‘Admit	him.’

The	 vizier,	 slight	 and	 fine-boned	 with	 a	 direct,	 intelligent	 gaze,	 made	 an	 elaborate	 obeisance.
‘Pardon	me,	Majesty,	for	disturbing	you	but	Mirza	Husain	begs	that	you	and	your	brother	will	honour
him	with	your	presence	at	a	feast	tonight.’
‘Of	course.’	Humayun	nodded	graciously.	‘We	would	be	pleased	to	attend	and	thank	Mirza	Husain
for	his	hospitality.’
The	vizier	bowed	and	withdrew.
As	 soon	 as	 the	 doors	 were	 closed	 again,	 Hindal	 smiled.	 ‘A	 good	 sign,	 don’t	 you	 think?	 Mirza
Husain	can’t	do	enough	for	us	.	.	.	’
‘You	may	be	right,	but	he	may	be	trying	to	placate	us	with	small	things	while	seeking	to	deny	us
what	we	really	want	.	.	.	let	us	see	.	.	.	’
That	 evening,	 as	 a	 hazy,	 pink	 dusk	 was	 falling,	 drums	 began	 to	 beat	 softly.	 Humayun	 and	 Hindal
followed	 the	 attendants	 sent	 by	 Mirza	 Husain	 into	 the	 palace’s	 central	 wing	 and	 up	 a	 long,	 shallow
staircase	strewn	with	jasmine	petals	and	lit	by	wicks	burning	in	diyas	filled	with	scented	oil.	At	the	top
of	 the	 stairs,	 Humayun	 and	 Hindal	 passed	 through	 a	 carved	 marble	 doorway	 into	 an	 octagonal
chamber	ablaze	with	light	from	giant	silver	candelabras	and	torches	burning	in	gilded	sconces	on	the
walls.	 Rugs	 gleaming	 with	 gold	 thread	 covered	 the	 floor	 while	 the	 walls	 were	 hung	 with	 richly
coloured	brocades	decorated	with	strings	of	pearls	and	coloured	glass	globes.	Directly	ahead	was	a
dais	draped	in	silver	cloth	and	piled	with	cushions.
As	 Humayun	 and	 his	 brother	 entered,	 musicians	 struck	 up.	 A	 smiling	 Mirza	 Husain	 advanced
towards	 his	 cousins.	 Hanging	 necklaces	 of	 frangipani	 blossoms	 around	 their	 necks	 after	 the
Hindustani	 custom,	 he	 led	 them	 to	 the	 places	 of	 honour	 on	 the	 dais.	 Once	 they	 were	 comfortably
seated,	 he	 clapped	 his	 hands	 and	 a	 succession	 of	 bearers	 entered	 through	 a	 side	 entrance,	 each
carrying	a	golden	dish	upon	his	shoulder	piled	with	food	–	pomfret	fish	steamed	in	banana	leaves	or
simmered	 in	 creamy	 coconut	 sauce,	 sides	 of	 roast	 deer,	 haunches	 of	 spiced	 lamb,	 aubergines
delicately	smoked	and	pureed,	fluffy	rice	cooked	with	split	peas	and	hot	bread	stuffed	with	sultanas
and	dried	apricots.
‘Eat,	Majesty,	eat,	and	you,	Prince	Hindal.	Eat,	my	cousins,	you	are	my	honoured	guests.	See,	the
food	is	good	.	.	.	Tell	me	what	dishes	tempt	you	and	I	myself	will	be	your	food	taster.	You	have	no
reason	to	fear	while	under	my	roof.	.	.’
‘I	 thank	 you,	 cousin.	 And	 I	 have	 no	 fear.’	 To	 secure	 his	 cousin’s	 help,	 Humayun	 knew	 he	 must
indeed	demonstrate	trust.	Without	hesitating,	he	took	a	piece	of	hot	bread	and	wrapping	it	around	a
chunk	of	fish	began	to	eat.	‘The	food	is	indeed	good.’
Later,	as	Humayun	lay	against	his	cushions,	Mirza	Husain	clapped	his	hands	and	three	girls	entered
the	 room	 through	 a	 side	 entrance	 and	 bowed	 low	 before	 him,	 eyes	 downcast.	 Then,	 simultaneously
striking	 their	 tambourines	 with	 their	 palms	 and	 stamping	 their	 feet	 on	 the	 floor	 causing	 the	 bronze
bells	around	their	ankles	to	clash,	they	began	to	dance.	One	was	tall	and	slender,	the	other	two	shorter
and	more	voluptuous.	Their	short,	tight	bodices	left	their	midriffs	bare.	The	swell	of	their	hips	and
buttocks	 was	 emphasised	 by	 the	 diaphanous	 pale	 pink	 silk	 of	 their	 voluminous	 trousers,	 which
fastened	round	their	waists	with	gold	cord	that	ended	in	pearl	tassels.Watching	the	girls	whirl	before
him,	for	a	moment	Humayun	imagined	he	was	back	in	the	Agra	fort,	his	empire	intact	and	nothing	to
concern	 him	 but	 the	 quest	 for	 yet	 greater	 glory	 and	 which	 concubine	 to	 choose	 for	 his	 night’s
pleasure.
At	a	wave	of	Mirza	Husain’s	bejewelled	hand,	the	girls	ran	off.	Attendants	cleared	the	dishes	and
others	brought	new	ones	–	platters	of	ripe	fruits	stuffed	with	marzipan,	delicate	almonds	covered	in
silver	leaf.	But	something	else	was	shining	amongst	them.	Looking	more	closely,	Humayun	saw	that

the	 sweetmeats	 rested	 on	 a	 bed	 of	 gems	 –	 rubies,	 carnelians,	 emeralds,	 turquoises,	 pearls	 of	 many
shapes	and	hues	and	glowing	golden	cat’s-eyes.
‘These	are	my	gift	to	you,	cousin.’	Mirza	Husain	selected	a	ruby	and	held	it	out	to	Humayun.	‘See
the	quality	of	this	gem.’
Humayun	took	the	stone	from	him	and	examined	it.	‘You	are	gracious	and	generous.’
‘I	 have	 sent	 other	 gifts	 to	 your	 commanders	 –	 jewelled	 scimitars,	 daggers,	 bridles	 and	 gilded
quivers,	paltry	compared	with	the	glories	of	the	Moghul	court	of	which	I	have	heard	so	much,	I	know,
but	 none	 the	 less	 acceptable,	 I	 hope.	 And	 now,	 I	 have	 another	 favour	 to	 ask.	 Will	 you	 permit	 me	 to
present	my	youngest	daughter	to	you?’
‘Of	course.’
Mirza	 Husain	 whispered	 something	 to	 an	 attendant.	 A	 few	 minutes	 later,	 a	 short,	 slight	 young
woman	 appeared	 in	 the	 great	 doorway	 through	 which	 two	 hours	 earlier	 Humayun	 and	 Hindal	 had
entered.	 Head	 erect,	 she	 walked	 slowly	 towards	 the	 dais.	 Humayun	 saw	 dark	 eyes	 and	 a	 widecheekboned,	almost	feline	face.	Reaching	the	dais,	she	knelt	before	it,	eyes	to	the	ground.
‘This	is	Khanam.’
At	Mirza	Husain’s	words,	Khanam	raised	her	head	and	looked	straight	into	Humayun’s	eyes.
‘My	daughter	is	a	skilled	musician.	Will	you	allow	her	to	play	for	you?’
‘Of	course.	It	would	be	a	pleasure	to	hear	her.’
At	 a	 signal	 from	 her	 father,	 Khanam	 stepped	 back	 a	 few	 paces	 and	 taking	 a	 round-bellied,	 longnecked	 stringed	 instrument	 from	 an	 attendant	 sat	 down	 on	 a	 wooden	 stool	 another	 brought	 for	 her.
Mirza	Husain	had	not	exaggerated	his	daughter ’s	talent.	As	she	plucked	the	strings,	haunting,	soaring
notes	filled	the	chamber.	Closing	his	eyes	for	a	moment,	Humayun	saw	his	mother	Maham,	head	bent
over	 the	 lute	 that	 had	 once	 belonged	 to	 his	 great-grandmother	 Esan	 Dawlat,	 who	 had	 preserved	 it
throughout	his	family’s	dangerous,	often	desperate	days	in	search	of	a	throne.
‘Khanam’s	 a	 beauty,	 isn’t	 she?	 The	 pick	 of	 all	 my	 daughters.	 Her	 mother	 was	 Persian.’	 Mirza
Husain’s	voice	cut	into	his	thoughts.
‘Your	daughter	is	very	beautiful,’	Humayun	replied	dutifully	though	for	his	taste	she	was	a	little	too
thin	 and	 certainly	 nothing	 to	 compare	 with	 Salima’s	 voluptuous	 charms.	 Her	 death	 –	 the	 cruel	 and
sudden	extinction	of	so	much	beauty	and	vitality	–	still	haunted	him.	It	seemed	a	symbol	of	how	much
he	had	lost	these	past	months.
Mirza	Husain	bent	nearer,	reducing	his	voice	to	a	whisper	that	only	Humayun	could	hear.	‘And	she
is	 ripe	 for	 marriage.	 I	 am	 wealthy.	 Her	 dowry	 will	 be	 considerable	 .	 .	 .	 almost	 imperial	 .	 .	 .	 ’	 He
smiled,	the	implication	of	his	words	unmistakable.
Humayun	looked	at	Khanam,	long	hair	reddened	with	henna	falling	round	her	as	she	continued	to
play.	Why	not?	he	thought.	Babur	had	made	several	dynastic	marriages	to	secure	his	position.Though
Khanam	didn’t	stir	him	particularly,	her	looks	were	well	enough.	She	shared	his	blood	and	her	father
would	 be	 a	 useful	 friend	 in	 the	 struggle	 against	 Sher	 Shah.Why	 not	 form	 an	 alliance	 to	 be
consummated	 one	 day	 in	 the	 marriage	 bed?	 It	 seemed	 that	 for	 once	 Kasim’s	 information	 had	 been
wrong	 –	 Mirza	 Husain	 was	 willing	 to	 help	 him.	 But	 of	 one	 thing	 Humayun	 was	 certain.	 Before	 he
could	think	of	taking	a	wife	he	must	defeat	his	enemies	and	be	sure	of	his	throne.	The	time	had	come
for	plain	speaking.
‘Mirza	 Husain,	 I	 would	 be	 glad	 one	 day	 to	 consider	 Khanam	 as	 a	 wife.	 She	 is	 a	 fine-looking,
accomplished	young	woman.	First,	though,	my	thoughts	must	be	on	war	and	the	recovery	of	my	lost
lands,	not	on	marriage,	and	I	want	your	help.You	have	been	generous	with	your	hospitality	and	your
gifts	but	I	need	your	armies.	Let	us	proclaim	our	alliance	to	the	world.’

Humayun	sat	back	against	the	cushions,	expecting	Mirza	Husain’s	gratitude,	even	joy.	The	prospect
of	 marriage	 with	 the	 Moghul	 emperor	 was	 beyond	 anything	 the	 sultan	 could	 have	 hoped	 for	 his
daughter.	But	he	saw	that	his	host’s	smile	was	no	longer	so	good-natured.The	curve	of	his	lips	seemed
to	harden	and	his	eyes	to	grow	cold.	‘Khanam,	enough!	Leave	us	now.’	His	tone	was	sharp.
Khanam	looked	up	in	surprise	and	at	once	stopped	playing.	Rising,	with	a	swish	of	her	long,	dark
blue	robes	she	hurried	from	the	chamber.
‘Cousin,	let	us	understand	one	another.’	Mirza	Husain	spoke	quietly.	‘I	did	not	invite	you	here.	You
came.	I	received	you	out	of	duty.	Sher	Shah	is	in	Lahore,	barely	six	hundred	miles	away	–	perhaps
nearer	for	all	we	know	–	with	armies	far	outnumbering	yours	and	mine	combined.	For	the	present	I
dare	not	antagonise	him.	I	can	give	you	money	and	I	will	willingly	give	you	my	daughter	if	you	will
promise	to	protect	and	honour	her	but	no	more	than	that.	Take	Khanam	with	my	blessing,	as	my	gift
to	absolve	me	with	honour	of	further	obligations	to	you	in	your	present	troubles,	but	leave	my	lands
before	you	bring	disaster	upon	me	and	my	people.’
Mirza	 Husain’s	 voice	 had	 risen	 so	 all	 could	 hear	 and	 Humayun	 saw	 Hindal	 looking	 at	 him	 with
astonishment.	 Hot	 anger	 flooded	 through	 him.	 Kasim	 had	 been	 right	 after	 all.	 ‘Mirza	 Husain,	 the
blood	 of	 Timur	 –	 of	 the	 amirzada	 –	 runs	 through	 your	 veins	 yet	 you	 speak	 like	 a	 merchant	 not	 a
warrior	.	.	.	’
Mirza	Husain	flushed.The	taunt	had	bitten	home,	Humayun	saw	with	satisfaction.	No	man	liked	to
hear	such	words	–	even	less	to	hear	them	under	his	own	roof.
‘Your	ambition	is	dangerous,’	said	Mirza	Husain.	‘Accept	your	setback.	Leave	Hindustan.	Go	back
to	Kabul,	to	your	homelands	there.	They	are	a	sufficient	kingdom.	You	cannot	flourish	where	you	do
not	belong.’
‘You	forget	yourself.	My	father	conquered	Hindustan	and	founded	an	empire	which	he	bequeathed
to	me.	I	do	belong	there.You	should	not	be	trying	to	buy	me	off	with	a	bag	of	gold	and	your	daughter
.	.	.	Instead,	you	and	I	should	be	planning	how	to	recapture	my	lands.	Immediately	we	have	won	our
first	victories,	others	will	rally	once	more	to	my	banner.	Yet	you	refuse	to	recognise	this.	You	have
grown	so	fat	on	trade	you	seem	to	have	forgotten	our	warrior	code	and	the	obligations	and	ambitions
it	carries	with	it	.	.	.	’
In	 his	 anger,	 Humayun	 had	 forgotten	 that	 others	 as	 well	 as	 his	 brother	 were	 close	 by.	 Several	 of
Mirza	Husain’s	nobles	were	seated	round	low	tables	beneath	the	dais	and	suddenly	he	became	aware
of	the	silence	that	had	fallen	and	of	their	startled	glances.	This	was	no	time	to	provoke	a	fight	or	even
an	open	breach.	Humayun	forced	a	smile	to	his	lips	though	he	felt	like	taking	his	host’s	plump	throat
in	his	hands.	‘But	I	forget	myself.	I	am	your	guest.	I	speak	my	mind	too	plainly.	This	is	neither	the
time	 nor	 the	 place	 for	 such	 a	 discussion,	 Mirza	 Husain.	 Forgive	 me.	 We	 will	 talk	 again	 tomorrow
when	we	can	be	alone	and	when	we	have	both	had	a	chance	to	reflect.’
But	the	look	on	Mirza	Husain’s	face	told	Humayun	that	he	had	little	to	hope	for	from	the	ruler	of
Sind.

Chapter	11
Hamida
Four	hours	after	Humayun	had	led	his	column	out	through	the	gatehouse	on	which	the	green	Moghul
banners	no	longer	fluttered,	the	fortress	palace	of	Sarkar	finally	faded	from	view.	As	he	rode	slowly
northeastwards,	 Humayun	 was	 locked	 in	 his	 thoughts.	 Though	 Mirza	 Husain’s	 hospitality	 had
remained	ostentatiously	lavish,	there	had	been	no	point	staying	any	longer	in	Sind.	With	so	few	men
to	back	him,	Humayun	had	no	power	to	coerce	Mirza	Husain	to	help	him	and	every	day	that	passed
had	seemed	a	humiliation	to	him.
It	felt	good	to	be	on	the	move	again	and	at	least	he	had	exacted	a	high	price	from	Mirza	Husain	for
the	four	cannon	he	had	decided	to	leave	behind	in	case	they	slowed	his	progress.	Eager	to	be	rid	of
his	 unwanted	 guest,	 the	 sultan	 had	 paid	 handsomely.	 He	 had	 also	 given	 Humayun	 grain	 and	 other
supplies	to	feed	his	men	and	fresh	pack	animals	to	carry	them.	If	all	went	well,	in	two	months’	time
Humayun	would	be	entering	the	desert	kingdom	of	Marwar	whose	Rajput	ruler,	Raja	Maldeo,	seemed
more	ready	to	assist	him	than	his	cousin.	The	raja’s	ambassador,	a	tall,	thin	man	in	brightly	coloured
robes	with	his	long	hair	bound	in	the	Rajput	fashion,	had	reached	Sarkar	two	weeks	before.	He	had
spoken	eloquently	to	Humayun	of	Raja	Maldeo’s	contempt	for	Sher	Shah	and	his	enmity	towards	him.
‘The	interloper	Sher	Shah	has	demanded	the	raja’s	allegiance	in	his	fight	against	the	Moghuls.	He
has	insulted	my	master ’s	honour	by	daring	to	threaten	the	kingdom	of	Marwar	if	he	refuses	to	join
him.	 But	 my	 master	 will	 never	 unite	 with	 a	 mongrel	 dog	 from	 the	 marshes	 of	 Bengal.	 Instead,	 he
extends	his	hand	to	you,	Majesty.	He	invites	you	to	Marwar	as	his	honoured	guest	so	that	you	and	he
may	discuss	how	to	combine	against	the	interloper.	With	your	approval	he	will	also	summon	other
Rajput	rulers	who,	like	him,	have	been	affronted	by	Sher	Shah’s	impudence.’
The	screeching	of	a	flock	of	green	parakeets	flying	low	overhead	recalled	Humayun	to	the	present.
He	glanced	at	Hindal,	riding	by	his	side	on	the	long-necked,	powerfully	built	chestnut	stallion	he	had
purchased	from	an	Arab	horse-dealer	in	Sind.
‘In	another	ten	miles	we’ll	make	camp	for	the	night,’	Humayun	said.
‘We	should.	The	women	will	be	tired	.	.	.	’
‘I’ll	 order	 some	 sheep	 to	 be	 killed	 and	 roasted.	 Tonight	 you	 and	 I	 and	 the	 women	 of	 our
households	will	feast	in	my	tent	together	with	our	chief	commanders	and	courtiers.	And	I	will	have
tables	set	up	outside	for	our	soldiers.	It	will	raise	the	spirits	of	us	all	.	.	.	’
‘Do	you	really	think	the	Raja	of	Marwar	will	help	us?’
‘Why	not?	I	often	heard	our	father	speak	of	Rajput	pride.	If	Maldeo	truly	believes	Sher	Shah	has
insulted	him,	he’ll	not	rest	until	he	has	avenged	the	slight	and	what	better	way	than	to	ride	at	our	side
with	his	Rajput	warriors	to	destroy	Sher	Shah?	Of	course	the	raja	will	expect	favours	in	return	but	the
courage	of	the	Rajputs	is	legendary.	Maldeo	will	be	a	worthy	ally	and	when	I	sit	on	my	throne	in	Agra
once	more	I	will	reward	him.’
‘You	still	have	faith	in	our	dynasty	and	its	destiny,	after	all	that	has	happened	.	.	.	?’
‘Yes.	 Even	 in	 my	 bleakest	 moments	 when	 I	 think	 of	 all	 the	 blood	 that	 has	 been	 shed	 and	 of

Kamran’s	 and	 Askari’s	 treachery,	 I	 don’t	 doubt	 it.	 I	 believe	 that	 fate	 summoned	 the	 Moghuls	 to
Hindustan.	Don’t	you	feel	it	too?’
Hindal,	though,	said	nothing.
‘Our	father	endured	many	setbacks	and	he	never	gave	up,’	Humayun	persisted.	‘If	you	doubt	me,
read	his	diaries	or	talk	to	our	aunt.	Khanzada	is	growing	old	but	our	father ’s	passion,	the	passion	of
our	ancestors,	lives	on	undimmed	in	her.	She	was	the	one	who	tore	me	from	my	opium	dreams	and
made	me	see	that	a	sense	of	greatness	isn’t	enough	–	that	we	must	be	prepared	to	fight	and	struggle
and	sweat	blood	for	what	is	ours.’
‘Ours?’
‘Of	course.	Though	our	father	named	me	emperor,	we	are	all	Babur ’s	sons,	all	part	of	the	Moghul
destiny	 –	 you,	 me	 and	 even	 Kamran	 and	 Askari.	 We	 bear	 the	 same	 responsibilities.	 Our	 dynasty	 is
young,	the	roots	barely	finding	a	purchase	in	this	alien	soil,	but	we	can	–	we	will	–	be	great	so	long	as
we	do	not	lose	our	self-belief	or	tear	our	dynasty	apart	by	fighting	one	another.’
‘Perhaps	 you	 are	 right.	 Sometimes,	 though,	 it	 all	 seems	 such	 a	 burden	 that	 I	 wish	 I	 were	 back	 in
Kabul,	that	our	father	had	never	heard	of	Hindustan	.	.	.	’	The	expression	in	Hindal’s	tawny	eyes	was
unconvinced	and	his	tall,	thick-set	body	seemed	to	slump	despondently	in	the	saddle.
Humayun	reached	out	and	touched	his	brother ’s	muscular	shoulder.	‘I	understand,’	he	said	quietly,
‘but	it	was	not	our	choice	to	be	born	who	we	are.’
Three	hours	later,	the	camp	fires	were	being	lit	in	the	lee	of	a	low,	stony	hill	that	Ahmed	Khan	–
riding	ahead	with	his	scouts	–	had	found.	Humayun’s	large	scarlet	tent	was	pitched	in	the	centre	with
Hindal’s	next	to	it.	Fifty	yards	away	were	tents	for	Khanzada	and	Gulbadan	and	their	attendants	and
for	 the	 small	 group	 of	 women	 in	 Hindal’s	 entourage,	 all	 enclosed	 by	 baggage	 wagons	 drawn	 up
around	them	in	a	protective	circle	with	their	traces	knotted.
Men	squatted	on	the	ground,	slapping	a	mixture	of	flour	and	water	into	flat	loaves	to	bake	on	hot
clay	 tiles	 in	 the	 fire.	 Soon	 the	 aroma	 of	 lamb	 was	 mingling	 with	 the	 smell	 of	 wood	 smoke	 as	 the
cooks’	 boys	 slowly	 rotated	 the	 sharpened	 stakes	 on	 which	 chunks	 of	 new-slain	 sheep,	 salted	 and
rubbed	with	herbs,	had	been	spitted.	The	fires	hissed	as	the	fat	ran	into	the	leaping	flames.	Humayun’s
stomach	growled	as,	inside	his	tent,	he	drew	off	his	gauntlets	and	Jauhar	unclipped	his	sword	belt.
‘Jauhar,	this	is	the	first	feast	I’ve	held	since	we	left	Lahore.	Though	it	will	be	poor	compared	with
the	celebrations	I	once	held	in	my	palaces,	we	must	put	on	a	good	display.	All	must	eat	and	drink	their
fill	.	.	.	For	those	eating	in	my	tent,	have	the	silver	and	gold	dishes	unpacked	.	.	.	and	I	wish	you	to	play
your	flute	for	us.	It	is	a	long	time	since	I	have	heard	you.’
Later	that	night,	dressed	in	a	dark	green	tunic	over	buckskin	trousers	and	jewelled	dagger	tucked
into	his	yellow	sash,	Humayun	looked	around	him	with	satisfaction.	To	his	left,	Hindal	and	the	senior
officers	were	sitting	in	a	semicircle	on	the	ground,	laughing	and	talking.	Zahid	Beg	was	gnawing	on
a	lamb	bone.	Despite	his	leanness,	he	could	easily	out-eat	any	of	Humayun’s	other	commanders	and
took	pride	in	his	gigantic	appetite.	Humayun	smiled	to	see	him	discard	the	bone	and	hack	off	a	fresh
hunk	of	roasted	flesh	with	his	dagger.
On	the	far	side	of	the	tent,	encircled	by	high	screens	that	concealed	them	from	view,	a	small	group
of	 women	 including	 Khanzada	 and	 Gulbadan	 were	 seated.	 Their	 conversation	 sounded	 decorously
muted	and	their	laughter	was	more	restrained	than	the	men’s	but	almost	as	frequent.	Humayun	hoped
they	had	everything	they	wanted	and	decided	to	see	for	himself.	Looking	round	the	edge	of	the	screen
he	 saw	 Gulbadan	 talking	 to	 a	 young	 woman	 seated	 close	 beside	 her,	 feet	 gracefully	 curled	 beneath
her.	 The	 woman’s	 face	 was	 in	 shadow	 but	 as	 she	 leaned	 forward	 to	 take	 a	 sweetmeat	 from	 a	 dish,
candlelight	illuminated	her	features.

Humayun	felt	a	tightening	in	his	stomach	as	he	took	in	the	graceful	set	of	her	small	head	on	her
long	 slender	 neck,	 the	 pale	 oval	 of	 her	 face,	 the	 shining	 dark	 hair	 pulled	 back	 and	 secured	 with
jewelled	combs	and	the	luminous	eyes	which,	suddenly	aware	of	his	scrutiny,	she	turned	towards	him.
Her	gaze	was	open	and	appraising	–	no	trace	of	nervousness	that	she	was	looking	at	the	emperor	–
and	it	sent	an	almost	visceral	shock	through	him.	As	Humayun	continued	to	stare,	the	young	woman
dropped	her	gaze	and	turned	back	to	Gulbadan.	Her	profile	–	they	were	sharing	some	joke	by	the	way
she	was	smiling	–	showed	a	small	nose	and	delicate	chin.	Then,	leaning	back,	she	was	once	more	lost
to	the	shadows.
Humayun	 returned	 to	 his	 place	 with	 the	 men,	 his	 polite	 interest	 in	 the	 women’s	 well-being
completely	forgotten.	As	the	feast	continued	he	found	it	hard	to	concentrate,	so	haunted	was	he	by	that
glimpse	of	an	unknown	face.	He	tapped	his	brother	on	the	shoulder.
‘Hindal,	there’s	a	young	woman	sitting	by	your	sister	whom	I	don’t	recognise	–	take	a	look	and	tell
me	 if	 you	 know	 her.’	 Hindal	 rose,	 went	 across	 to	 the	 screen	 and	 peered	 round.	 Then	 slowly	 he
returned	to	Humayun’s	side.
‘Well?’
It	 seemed	 to	 Humayun	 that	 Hindal	 hesitated	 before	 answering.	 ‘Her	 name	 is	 Hamida.	 She’s	 the
daughter	of	my	vizier,	Shaikh	Ali	Akbar	.	.	.	’
‘How	old	is	she?’
‘About	fourteen	or	fifteen	.	.	.	’
‘To	which	of	the	clans	does	Shaikh	Ali	Akbar	belong?’
‘His	family	is	of	Persian	descent	but	were	long	settled	in	Samarkand	until,	in	our	father ’s	time,	the
Uzbeks	drove	them	out.	Shaikh	Ali	Akbar	fled	as	a	young	man	and	eventually	found	his	way	to	my
province	of	Alwar.	I	made	him	my	chief	counsellor	there.’
‘Is	he	a	good	counsellor?’
‘Yes.	 And	 something	 more	 than	 that,	 perhaps.	 The	 blood	 of	 a	 famous	 mystic	 runs	 in	 his	 veins	 –
Ahmad	of	Jam,	who	had	the	ability	to	foretell	events.	In	his	lifetime	he	was	known	as	Zinda-fil,	 “the
Terrible	Elephant”,	because	of	his	powers.’
‘Tomorrow	morning	before	we	march	send	Shaikh	Ali	Akbar	to	me.	I	wish	to	talk	to	him.’
Humayun	barely	slept	that	night.	Though	in	Sarkar	he	had	told	Mirza	Husain	he	would	not	take	a
wife	until	he	had	won	back	his	throne,	he	knew	in	his	very	soul	that	he	must	marry	Hamida.	There	was
no	thought,	no	logic	to	it,	just	an	overwhelming	attraction.	A	feeling	which,	despite	his	many	previous
lovers,	 he	 had	 never	 experienced	 with	 such	 overpowering	 intensity	 before,	 not	 even	 when	 he	 had
chosen	Salima.	It	was	not	simply	the	desire	to	possess	Hamida	physically	–	though	that	was	certainly	a
part	of	it.	Instinctively	he	sensed	within	her	a	beauty	of	mind,	a	strength	of	spirit	radiating	out	towards
him.	He	knew	that	not	only	would	she	make	him	happy	but	that	with	her	by	his	side	he	would	also	be	a
better	ruler,	more	able	to	achieve	his	ambitions.	However	hard	he	tried	to	dismiss	such	thoughts	as
irrational	and	better	fitted	to	a	blushing	adolescent,	they	returned	with	renewed	vigour.	Was	this	what
the	poets	described	as	falling	in	love?
Even	 before	 it	 was	 light,	 Humayun	 washed,	 dressed	 and	 then,	 dismissing	 his	 attendants,	 waited
impatiently.	 At	 last	 his	 men	 began	 to	 stir,	 kicking	 the	 smouldering	 embers	 of	 last	 night’s	 fires	 into
new	 life	 and	 starting	 to	 pack	 up	 their	 tents	 and	 possessions	 ready	 for	 the	 day’s	 ride.Then	 he	 heard
footsteps	outside	his	tent	and	Jauhar	held	back	the	flap	as	Shaikh	Ali	Akbar	ducked	inside.
‘Majesty,	you	wished	to	see	me.’	Shaikh	Ali	Akbar	was	tall	and,	like	his	daughter,	fine-boned.	He
made	graceful	obeisance	to	Humayun	and	waited.
‘I	saw	your	daughter,	Hamida,	at	the	feast	last	night.	I	want	to	make	her	my	wife.	She	will	be	my

empress	and	the	mother	of	emperors	.	.	.	’	Humayun	burst	out.
Shaikh	Ali	Akbar	looked	astonished.
‘Well,	Shaikh	Ali	Akbar?’	Humayun	persisted	impatiently.
‘She	is	so	young	.	.	.	’
‘Many	are	married	at	her	age.	I	will	treat	her	with	great	honour,	I	promise	you	.	.	.	’
‘But	my	family	is	not	worthy	.	.	.	’
‘You	are	nobles	of	Samarkand	.	.	.	Why	object	if	I	wish	to	raise	your	daughter	further	as	my	father
did	my	own	mother?	Her	father	–	my	grandfather	Baisanghar	–	was	a	nobleman	of	Samarkand	like
yourself.’
Shaikh	 Ali	 Akbar	 said	 nothing.	 Puzzled,	 Humayun	 stepped	 closer.	 From	 the	 man’s	 troubled	 face
something	was	wrong.	‘What	is	it?	Most	fathers	would	rejoice.’
‘It	 is	 a	 great,	 an	 unimaginable	 honour,	 Majesty.	 But	 I	 believe	 .	 .	 .	 no,	 I	 know	 .	 .	 .	 that	 your	 halfbrother	Prince	Hindal	cares	for	Hamida.	He	has	known	her	since	she	was	a	child.	I	serve	him	and	it
would	be	disloyal	of	me	to	give	her	to	another,	even	you,	Majesty,	without	telling	you	this.’
‘Are	they	yet	betrothed?’
‘No,	Majesty.’
‘And	Hamida.	What	are	her	wishes?’
‘I	do	not	know,	Majesty.	I’ve	never	spoken	to	her	of	such	things	and	I	have	no	wife	who	could	have
done	so	.	.	.	Hamida’s	mother	died	of	a	fever	soon	after	she	was	born.’
‘You	have	been	honest.	I	respect	that	but	I	repeat	that	I	wish	to	wed	your	daughter.	Give	me	your
answer	within	a	week	from	now.	And	Shaikh	Ali	.	.	.	my	brother	told	me	that	the	blood	of	a	great	seer
who	could	foretell	events	runs	through	your	veins	.	.	.	If	you,	like	him,	have	the	power	to	see	into	the
future,	use	it.	You	will	see	that	greatness	–	and	happiness	–	await	your	daughter	if	you	will	give	her	to
me.’
‘Majesty.’	 But	 Shaikh	 Ali	 Akbar ’s	 face	 still	 looked	 anxious	 and	 unhappy	 as	 he	 turned	 to	 leave.
Shafts	of	sunlight	came	pouring	into	the	tent,	dazzling	Humayun	for	a	moment,	as	Shaikh	Ali	Akbar
pushed	the	entrance	flap	aside	and	vanished.
That	day,	needing	space	to	think,	Humayun	decided	to	leave	the	main	column	and	gallop	alone.	As
the	rhythmic	thud	of	his	horse’s	hooves	filled	his	ears,	he	was	still	trying	to	come	to	terms	with	these
feelings	so	unexpected,	so	overpowering,	so	sudden.	No	other	woman	had	roused	such	sensations	in
him.	Something	darker	was	also	lurking	in	his	heart	–	guilt	that	he	wanted	to	take	a	woman	loved	by
his	 half-brother.	 But	 he	 could	 not	 get	 Hamida’s	 exquisite	 face,	 her	 shining	 personality,	 out	 of	 his
mind.	He	would	make	her	his	empress	however	much	he	bruised	Hindal’s	feelings.
That	evening,	Humayun	was	splashing	his	face	with	cold	water	brought	to	him	in	a	brass	ewer	by
Jauhar	when	he	heard	raised	voices	outside	his	tent.	Then	Hindal	burst	in,	still	in	his	riding	clothes,
soiled	and	dusty	after	the	day’s	journey.
‘Is	it	true?’	Hindal’s	voice	was	quiet	but	his	eyes	were	burning.
‘Is	what	true?’	Humayun	gestured	to	Jauhar	to	withdraw.
‘Shaikh	Ali	Akbar	tells	me	you	wish	to	marry	Hamida.’
‘Yes.	I	want	her	for	my	wife.’
‘She	.	.	.	she	is	the	daughter	of	my	vizier.	I	watched	her	grow	up	.	.	.	My	claim	to	her	is	stronger	than
yours	.	.	.	’	Hindal	seemed	almost	hysterical.
‘I	did	not	want	to	cause	you	pain,	but	it	will	pass.	You	will	find	another	woman	to	please	you	.	.	.	’
‘These	last	few	months	I	thought	we	had	come	to	understand	one	another.	I	trusted	you.	I	gave	you
my	support	when	–	like	Kamran	and	Askari	–	I	could	have	sought	my	fortune	elsewhere	and	perhaps

fared	 better.What	 reward	 have	 I	 had	 for	 following	 you?	 Nothing!	 We	 fled	 Lahore	 with	 our	 tails
between	our	legs.	In	Sind	we	fared	little	better	–	fed	like	little	lapdogs	by	Mirza	Husain	until	we	took
ourselves	off.	Still	I	remained	loyal	and	worked	to	keep	my	force	of	men	together	in	the	hopes	that
soon	you	and	I	would	be	fighting	shoulder	to	shoulder	against	Sher	Shah.	Instead,	like	a	thief	in	the
night,	without	a	moment’s	thought,	you	have	decided	to	abuse	your	position	as	head	of	our	family	to
steal	the	woman	I	love	.	.	.	’
‘Believe	me,	I	didn’t	know	that	you	cared	for	her	until	I	spoke	to	her	father.’
‘But	it	didn’t	stop	you	when	you	found	out,	did	it?’	Hindal	came	closer.	‘Kamran	and	Askari	were
right.You	are	the	self-appointed	centre	of	your	own	universe.	For	years	you	ignored	us,	leaving	us	to
fester	in	our	provinces	while	you	played	the	great	emperor.	It	was	only	because	you	needed	us	against
Sher	Shah	that	you	began	to	speak	of	fraternal	duty,	of	bonding	together	against	a	common	enemy.’
Hindal’s	voice	was	rising	to	a	shout	and	he	was	shaking	with	pent-up	fury.	Instinctively,	Humayun
glanced	 to	 the	 chest	 on	 which	 a	 few	 minutes	 earlier	 Jauhar	 had	 placed	 Alamgir	 in	 its	 jewelled
scabbard.	He	still	had	his	dagger	and	could	feel	its	hard	metal	hilt	pressing	against	his	ribs	beneath	his
sash.
‘Be	careful	what	you	say,	brother	.	.	.	’
‘Half-brother	only.’
‘You	 forget	 why	 I	 sent	 you	 and	 the	 others	 away.	 You	 plotted	 against	 me.	 I	 could	 have	 had	 you
executed	.	.	.	I	gave	you	back	your	life.’
‘I	was	just	a	youth,	easily	led.	If	you’d	shown	any	interest	in	me	it	would	never	have	happened.	But
all	you	ever	wanted	to	do	was	stare	at	the	stars	.	.	.	You	still	have	no	desire	to	know	what	I’m	really
like,	 what	 my	 hopes	 and	 aspirations	 are.	 You	 just	 want	 my	 unquestioning	 loyalty	 and	 obedience	 so
you	can	realise	your	own	ambitions	.	.	.	’
Humayun	had	never	seen	or	heard	his	half-brother	so	animated.	He	was	breathing	heavily.	His	face
was	flushed,	his	nostrils	were	dilated	and	a	vein	throbbed	at	his	temple.
‘We	must	not	quarrel	over	this,	Hindal.	Believe	me,	this	isn’t	just	some	whim	or	momentary	lust
for	a	new	woman.	I	didn’t	plan	it	–	it	happened.	When	I	saw	her	at	the	feast	I	knew	.	.	.	’
But	 Hindal	 didn’t	 seem	 to	 be	 listening.	 Without	 warning	 he	 launched	 himself	 at	 Humayun	 who,
taken	off	guard,	didn’t	move	quickly	enough.	Hindal’s	powerful	hands	grabbed	him	by	the	shoulders
and	the	next	thing	Humayun	knew,	he	was	crashing	into	a	tall	iron	incense	burner.
Hearing	 the	 noise,	 Humayun’s	 guards	 rushed	 into	 the	 tent.	 ‘No!’	 he	 shouted,	 waving	 them	 back.
Hindal	was	closing	in	on	him	again	and	Humayun	felt	his	half-brother ’s	leather-booted	foot	slam	into
his	 ribs,	 knocking	 the	 breath	 from	 him.	 But	 from	 the	 days	 of	 his	 youth	 Humayun	 had	 been	 a	 good
wrestler	–	quick	and	strong	–	and	the	skills	hadn’t	deserted	him.	Instinctively	he	grabbed	at	Hindal’s
foot	as	his	brother	tried	to	kick	him	again	and	twisted	it	sharply.	Thrown	off	balance,	Hindal’s	heavy
body	tumbled	sideways	and	he	hit	his	head	on	the	edge	of	the	metal-bound	chest	where	Humayun	kept
his	most	valued	possessions	–	the	Koh-i-Nur	and	his	father ’s	diaries.
With	blood	trickling	from	his	temple	and	looking	dazed,	Hindal	hauled	himself	to	his	feet.	Before
he	could	steady	himself,	Humayun	ducked	forward,	pitting	his	speed	and	momentum	against	Hindal’s
bulk.	Hooking	his	right	foot	behind	Hindal’s	left	leg,	he	succeeded	in	pushing	him	backwards,	falling
with	 him	 and	 landing	 on	 top.	 He	 seized	 Hindal’s	 head	 with	 both	 hands,	 raised	 it	 up	 then	 brought	 it
smashing	down	on	the	ground.	Hindal	writhed	beneath	him,	trying	 to	 dislodge	 him,	 but	 Humayun’s
fingers	 were	 pressing	 on	 his	 windpipe.	 Hindal’s	 breath	 was	 coming	 in	 great,	 rasping	 sobs	 as	 he
thrashed	 wildly,	 almost	 sending	 Humayun	 flying.	 However,	 gripping	 as	 hard	 as	 he	 could	 with	 his
thighs,	Humayun	stayed	uppermost	and	pressed	harder	on	his	brother ’s	throat.

He	felt	Hindal	slacken	beneath	him	and	looked	down	at	his	face	–	it	might	be	a	trick,	one	that	he’d
used	 many	 times	 himself	 in	 wrestling	 contests	 –	 but	 Hindal’s	 eyes	 were	 closed	 and	 his	 face	 was
purpling.	Humayun	relaxed	his	grip	and	rose	cautiously	from	his	brother ’s	prone	body,	eyes	never
for	an	instant	leaving	him.
Hindal	 was	 taking	 great	 gulping	 mouthfuls	 of	 air	 as	 he	 struggled	 to	 breathe	 and	 his	 hands	 were
clutching	 at	 his	 neck	 which	 Humayun	 could	 see	 was	 already	 darkening	 with	 bruises.	 After	 a	 few
moments,	he	got	shakily	to	his	feet,	looking	like	a	great	bear	that	had	just	been	worsted	in	a	fight.	The
cut	on	his	temple	was	bleeding	even	more	profusely,	so	that	blood	was	dripping	on	to	the	front	of	his
tunic.	But	the	eyes	he	turned	on	Humayun	were	clear,	bright	and	defiant.
‘Take	her	then.	You	are	the	emperor	as	you	never	tire	of	reminding	me.	But	do	not	expect	to	see	me
again.	Our	alliance	is	over.	Tonight	I	will	take	my	men	and	ride	from	here.’
‘I	didn’t	want	to	hurt	you.	You	forced	me	to.	Don’t	act	rashly	.	.	.	I	never	schemed	to	take	Hamida
from	you	.	.	.	but	when	I	saw	her	I	knew	it	was	meant	to	be	.	.	.	’
A	 sneer	 spread	 across	 Hindal’s	 bleeding	 face.	 ‘Meant	 to	 be	 .	 .	 .	 ?	 You	 still	 don’t	 understand	 the
minds	 of	 men,	 do	 you,	 not	 even	 your	 own	 brother ’s.	 You	 inhabit	 a	 different	 world	 in	 which	 you
confuse	 fate	 or	 destiny	 with	 your	 own	 desires	 and	 much	 good	 may	 it	 do	 you.	 Goodbye,	 brother.’
Drawing	himself	up,	Hindal	spat	slowly	and	deliberately	on	the	carpet,	sending	a	gob	of	bloody	saliva
to	land	just	in	front	of	Humayun’s	right	boot.	Then,	without	a	backward	glance,	he	walked	slowly	and
painfully	 but	 straight-backed	 towards	 the	 entrance	 of	 the	 tent,	 looking	 to	 neither	 right	 nor	 left	 as
Humayun’s	bodyguards	parted	to	let	him	pass.
For	a	moment	Humayun	was	tempted	to	go	after	him,	but	what	would	be	the	point?	After	what	had
been	 said,	 there	 could	 be	 no	 going	 back.	 ‘Jauhar,’	 he	 called.	 As	 soon	 as	 Jauhar	 was	 by	 his	 side,
Humayun	lowered	his	voice	so	they	would	not	be	overheard.	‘Send	my	bodyguards	immediately	to
the	 tents	 of	 my	 brother ’s	 women.They	 are	 to	 find	 Hamida,	 daughter	 of	 Shaikh	 Ali	 Akbar,	 my
brother ’s	vizier,	and	escort	her	into	the	care	of	my	aunt.	Hurry,	and	let	me	know	as	soon	as	my	orders
have	been	carried	out	.	.	.	’
Half	 an	 hour	 later,	 Jauhar	 returned	 to	 report	 that	 Hamida	 had	 been	 taken	 to	 Khanzada.	 Outside,
Humayun	could	hear	men	shouting	and	running	about,	oxen	bellowing,	the	jingling	of	bridles	and	the
neighing	 of	 horses.	 Peering	 out	 through	 the	 tent	 flaps	 he	 saw	 by	 the	 orange	 light	 burning	 in	 the
braziers	that	Hindal’s	men	were	striking	camp.	His	half-brother ’s	tent	had	already	been	collapsed	and
was	 being	 loaded	 on	 to	 a	 cart.	 As	 he	 continued	 to	 watch,	 Humayun	 made	 out	 a	 familiar	 figure
hurrying	towards	his	tent	through	the	press.
‘Humayun,	what	have	you	done?	.	.	.	Have	you	lost	your	mind?’	Khanzada	shouted	even	before	she
was	 inside	 Humayun’s	 tent.	 ‘How	 can	 you	 hope	 to	 succeed	 if	 Hindal	 leaves?	 And	 all	 because	 of	 a
woman	you	caught	a	fleeting	glimpse	of,	a	woman	you’ve	never	even	spoken	to	and	whom	without
telling	me	you’ve	consigned	into	my	care.’	He	had	seen	his	aunt	angry	many	times	before	but	never
with	such	a	look	of	outraged	bafflement	in	her	eyes.	‘Forget	this	madness.	Go	to	Hindal	now,	before
it	is	too	late,	and	tell	him	you	will	give	up	the	girl.’
‘I	can’t,	Aunt.	It’s	as	if	I	had	no	choice	.	.	.	’
‘Rubbish!’	 Coming	 closer,	 she	 stared	 into	 his	 eyes.	 ‘Are	 you	 taking	 opium	 again?	 Having
hallucinations?	Is	that	what	is	making	you	act	so	crazily?	I	saw	Hindal’s	bruised	and	bleeding	face	.	.	.
is	that	the	behaviour	of	an	emperor,	to	pound	your	brother	into	submission	and	drive	him	from	your
camp?’
‘He	attacked	me	.	.	.	’
‘That’s	not	the	point.	He	was	loyal	to	you	at	a	time	when	few	others	are,	when	our	dynasty’s	fate	in

Hindustan	has	never	been	more	uncertain.	Your	latest	madness	has	left	us	in	desperate	straits	–	how
many	men	do	you	have	left	of	those	who	rode	with	you	from	Lahore?	Eight	or	nine	thousand	only.	I
know	because	Kasim	told	me.	If	Hindal	goes,	how	many	will	you	have	then?	Five	or	six	thousand	at
most.	And	how	many	of	them	will	stay	when	they	begin	to	doubt	your	judgement?	Soon	you’ll	barely
have	enough	to	defend	us	from	brigands	and	dacoits,	let	alone	get	back	your	throne.	And	all	through
unbridled,	heedless,	selfish	desire	.	.	.	’
‘No.The	 moment	 I	 saw	 Hamida,	 I	 felt	 something	 different	 from	 mere	 physical	 desire,	 something
I’d	never	experienced	.	.	.	I	knew	love	had	overwhelmed	me	and	that	I	wanted	her	as	my	wife.	I	had	not
thought	 such	 things	 possible	 but	 it	 happened.	 I	 promise	 I’m	 not	 fuddled	 with	 wine	 and	 opium.	 My
mind	is	clear	and	I	know	that	what	I	am	doing	is	right.	Aunt	.	.	.	’	he	laid	a	hand	gently	on	her	shoulder,
‘trust	me	and	help	me	in	this	.	.	.	I	beg	you	.	.	.	’
‘I	can’t.	I’m	getting	old,	Humayun.	I’ve	seen	too	much,	suffered	too	much,	to	have	any	energy	left.
Ever	since	Babur	died	I’ve	tried	to	help	you	as	I	promised	him	I	would.	You	have	shown	you	are	a
fearless	fighter	but	you	have	so	much	to	learn	about	being	a	king	and	I	wonder	whether	you	ever	will.
You	are	different	from	your	father.	Babur	always	used	his	head.	His	marriages	–	even	to	your	mother
whom	he	loved	–	were	considered	acts.	He	didn’t	behave	like	a	selfish	boy	who	must	always	indulge
his	lusts	and	desires	without	a	thought	for	the	consequences.	First	opium.	Now	this.’
‘But	Aunt,	as	I	keep	trying	to	tell	you,	my	feelings	for	Hamida	go	far	beyond	simple	desire	.	.	.	’
‘And	what	about	Hamida’s	feelings,	left	here	without	her	father?	You	know	of	course	that	Shaikh	Ali
Akbar	is	going	with	Hindal?	He	has	just	been	to	bid	his	daughter	goodbye.’
‘I	didn’t	know.’
‘Gulbadan	 is	 trying	 to	 soothe	 Hamida	 but	 she	 is	 distraught.	 Truth	 be	 told,	 Gulbadan	 is	 distressed
too,	though	she	has	chosen	to	stay	with	me	rather	than	go	with	her	brother.’
‘I	never	meant	that	.	.	.	I	.	.	.	’
‘No	more,	Humayun.’
Khanzada	turned	and	left	the	tent.	Humayun	waited,	hoping	she	might	relent	and	come	back	but	she
didn’t.	He	sat	down	and	for	a	while	just	stared	into	the	dancing	amber	flame	of	an	oil	lamp.	Was	his
aunt	 right	 as	 she	 so	 often	 was?	 Certainly,	 he	 had	 been	 impulsive	 –	 reckless	 even	 –	 and	 he	 had	 hurt
Hamida.	He	had	also	broken	the	fragile	bonds	that	had	been	forming	between	himself	and	Hindal.
‘Majesty.’	 It	 was	 Jauhar	 and	 in	 his	 hand	 was	 a	 piece	 of	 paper	 which	 he	 held	 out	 to	 Humayun.
‘Shaikh	Ali	Akbar	asked	me	to	give	you	this.’
You	are	the	emperor,	Humayun	read,	if	you	ask	me	for	my	daughter	I	cannot	refuse.	I	leave	her	with
a	heavy	heart	but	I	must	go	with	your	brother	to	whom,	long	ago,	I	swore	to	be	loyal.	Treat	Hamida
well.	I	have	no	power	to	protect	her	and	must	trust	you	to	do	so	as	you	have	pledged.	Shaikh	Ali	Akbar.
A	fierce	happiness	filled	Humayun,	overriding	any	lurking	feelings	of	doubt	or	of	guilt	about	his
behaviour	 towards	 Hindal.	 ‘I	 will	 protect	 her	 with	 my	 life,	 Shaikh	 Ali	 Akbar.	 I	 will	 make	 her
happy.You	have	no	cause	to	fear,’	he	whispered	to	himself.
Next	day,	riding	at	the	head	of	his	depleted	column	across	a	pale	landscape	baked	hard	by	the	sun,
Humayun	still	felt	suffused	with	joy.	If	only	the	price	had	not	been	his	rift	with	Hindal.	An	hour	ago
his	heart	had	quickened	at	the	sight	of	dust	rising	from	the	road	ahead.	Seized	by	hope	that	Hindal	had
changed	his	mind	and	was	coming	back,	he’d	despatched	scouts	to	investigate	but	they’d	found	only	a
group	of	silk	merchants	with	their	mules.	By	now	Hindal	was	probably	some	miles	to	the	northwest
of	Humayun’s	column.According	to	Kasim,	who	had	spoken	briefly	to	one	of	Hindal’s	commanders,
his	half-brother	planned	to	cross	the	Indus	and	head	north.
Was	 Hindal	 intending	 to	 seek	 out	 Kamran	 and	 Askari?	 With	 all	 three	 of	 his	 half-brothers	 allied

against	 him	 once	 more,	 his	 own	 situation	 would	 be	 perilous.	 Hindal	 knew	 exactly	 where	 Humayun
was	 taking	 his	 army	 and	 what	 his	 strategy	 was.	 Such	 information	 would	 be	 useful	 to	 Kamran	 and
Askari	 –	 and	 of	 course	 to	 Sher	 Shah.	 Humayun	 rode	 on	 oblivious	 of	 the	 bleached	 landscape	 as	 he
brooded	on	this	fresh	twist	in	his	fortunes.	His	disappointment	that	Hindal	had	not	returned	was	not
simply	that	he	had	lost	an	ally	and	gained	an	enemy	but	that	over	the	last	months	he	had	grown	closer
to	his	youngest	half-brother	and	had	valued	his	companionship.
That	night	as	the	camp	was	being	set	up	and	the	cooking	fires	lit,	he	looked	longingly	to	where	the
women’s	tents	were	being	pitched.	What	was	Hamida	doing	and	what	was	in	her	mind?	Desire	to	see
her	again	mingled	with	guilt	at	the	distress	he	had	caused	her	and	he	hesitated,	uncertain	as	a	youth
about	what	he	should	do.	Then	it	came	to	him.	Summoning	Jauhar,	he	ordered	him	to	ask	Khanzada	to
come	to	him.	As	the	minutes	passed,	Humayun	waited	anxiously.	He	would	not	be	surprised	if	his	aunt
refused	to	see	him,	but	when	Jauhar	finally	returned	Khanzada	was	with	him.
‘Well,	nephew,	I	understand	you	wish	to	see	me.’
‘Thank	you,	Aunt	.	.	.	’	Humayun	hesitated,	seeking	the	right	words.	‘Last	night	we	parted	in	anger.
There	was	much	justice	in	what	you	said.	Though	I	cannot	undo	what	has	happened	–	and	if	I	speak
honestly	I	would	not	wish	to	even	if	I	could	–	I’ve	reflected	upon	your	words.	All	my	life	you	have
stood	by	me,	helped	me.	Do	not	desert	me	now.’
Khanzada’s	expression	remained	stern	and	she	said	nothing	but	a	softening	in	her	raisin	eyes	gave
him	courage	to	go	on.
‘Tell	 Hamida	 that	 I’m	 sorry	 for	 my	 thoughtlessness,	 that	 I	 never	 meant	 to	 cause	 her	 pain.’	 He
stepped	a	little	closer.	‘Talk	to	her	of	me.	Tell	her	I	acted	only	out	of	love.	Plead	my	cause	.	.	.	She	will
listen	to	you.	And	tell	her	that	after	the	evening	meal	I	will	visit	you	all	–	but	only	if	she	is	willing.’
Two	hours	later,	Humayun	followed	some	of	Khanzada’s	attendants	as	they	guided	him	with	lighted
torches	through	the	camp	to	the	women’s	quarters.	Ducking	inside	Khanzada’s	tent,	he	saw	his	aunt
and	Gulbadan	seated	in	the	centre	on	low	stools	in	a	pool	of	soft	orange	light	shed	by	oil	lamps	and
wicks	 burning	 in	 diyas.	 They	 rose	 to	 greet	 him,	 and	 as	 he	 came	 towards	 them	 a	 veiled	 figure	 –	 he
knew	 it	 was	 Hamida	 –	 moved	 out	 of	 the	 shadows	 to	 stand	 at	 Khanzada’s	 side.	 Unbidden,	 Hamida
dropped	the	veil	covering	the	lower	part	of	her	face	and	stood	before	him.	He	hadn’t	realised	how	tall
Hamida	 was	 –	 at	 least	 three	 or	 four	 inches	 taller	 than	 either	 Khanzada	 or	 Gulbadan.	 She	 was	 also
slender,	standing	there	in	her	dark	blue	robes,	belted	with	a	silver	chain	set	with	turquoises.
‘Hamida.Thank	you	for	receiving	me	here.You	know	why	I’ve	come.	I	want	you	for	my	wife	.	.	.	’
Hamida	 said	 nothing	 but	 continued	 to	 look	 directly	 at	 him,	 her	 black,	 long-lashed	 eyes	 reddened
with	tears,	and	it	was	Humayun	who	lowered	his	gaze	first.
‘What	is	your	answer	to	me?’
‘My	father	told	me	I	must	obey	.	.	.	’
‘I	don’t	want	an	unwilling	bride	.	.	.	What	is	in	your	own	heart?’
‘I	don’t	know.	I	cannot	answer	you.	Only	yesterday	I	parted	from	my	father.	I	may	never	see	him
again	.	.	.	’
‘It	 was	 your	 father ’s	 choice	 to	 go	 with	 my	 brother.	 Shaikh	 Ali	 Akbar	 is	 a	 good	 man,	 loyal	 and
honest,	and	I	have	no	quarrel	with	him.	I	will	do	everything	in	my	power	to	make	sure	that	one	day	–
God	willing	–	you	are	reunited	with	him.	And	I	also	promise	that	I	will	be	a	good	husband	to	you.	I
will	love	and	honour	you.	And	though	at	present	my	fortunes	are	low,	my	ambitions	are	high	and	one
day	you	will	be	a	great	empress	.	.	.	I	swear	it	on	my	life.’
Hamida	 drew	 herself	 up	 but	 did	 not	 reply.	 She	 was	 still	 so	 young,	 Humayun	 thought.	 She	 was
grieving	at	her	sudden	separation	from	her	father	and	the	loss	of	much	of	what	was	familiar.	‘A	lot

has	happened,’	he	said	softly,	‘and	you	are	tired.	I	will	leave	you	now	but	think	over	what	I	have	said.’
‘I	will	think	about	it.’	Hamida	was	still	scrutinising	him	intently	as	if	trying	to	divine	something.
Humayun	felt	he	was	being	tested	and	for	the	first	time	his	confidence	wavered.	He	realised	that	he
had	come	to	her	tonight	sure	of	success,	believing	any	woman	would	be	dazzled	to	be	chosen	by	him
as	his	wife.

In	the	event,	Humayun	had	to	curb	his	impatience	and	wait	for	longer	than	he’d	expected.	He	found	it
hard	to	stop	himself	from	visiting	Khanzada’s	tent	each	night	to	see	Hamida	but	he	forced	himself	not
to.	 He	 had	 promised	 her	 time	 to	 consider	 and	 must	 abide	 by	 his	 promise.	 Nearly	 a	 month	 passed
before	 finally,	 on	 a	 humid	 evening	 with	 fireflies	 shining	 like	 jewels	 in	 the	 darkness	 around	 the
encampment,	Khanzada	at	last	brought	him	news.
‘Humayun,	Hamida	has	agreed.	She	will	become	your	wife	whenever	you	wish	it.’
A	tremendous	happiness	overwhelmed	him	and	he	embraced	his	aunt.	‘What	did	you	say	finally	to
convince	her?’
‘The	same	I’ve	been	telling	her	ever	since	I	took	her	into	my	care	–	that	she	must	marry	someone
and	who	better	than	a	king	–	indeed	an	emperor?	I	reminded	her	that	many	girls	of	good	family	are
married	 off	 to	 old	 men	 but	 that	 you	 are	 a	 handsome	 warrior	 in	 his	 prime	 with	 a	 certain	 reputation
among	the	women	.	.	.	’	Khanzada’s	eyes	twinkled.
‘You	are	certain	she	is	willing?’
‘Yes.	What	counted	most	with	her	was	my	promise	that	you	truly	love	her.’
‘I	do.’
‘I	know.	I’ve	seen	it	in	your	face	every	time	you	spoke	of	her,	otherwise	I	would	never	have	been
your	ally	in	this.’
‘What	about	Hindal?	Does	she	ever	mention	him?’
‘No.	He	may	have	loved	her	but	I	don’t	think	she	was	aware	of	it.	If	you	can	find	your	way	into	her
heart,	you’ll	find	no	rival	there	.	.	.	’
‘Thank	you,	Aunt.	As	ever,	you	have	been	my	benefactress.’
‘And	as	ever,	I	wish	you	happiness,	Humayun.’
‘Wait	–	I	wish	you	to	take	Hamida	a	present	from	me.’	Going	to	his	iron-bound	chest	he	took	out	a
piece	of	flowered	silk	and	unwrapping	it	extracted	the	double-stranded	necklace	of	fiery	rubies	and
uncut	dark	green	emeralds	set	in	gold	that	had	been	among	the	treasures	he	had	seized	in	Gujarat.	The
gems	glinted	richly	in	the	candlelight	and	would	well	become	Hamida’s	dark-eyed	beauty.	‘You	once
told	me	to	keep	this	to	give	to	my	wife	.	.	.	that	moment	has	come	.	.	.	’
The	next	morning,	Humayun	cancelled	the	day’s	march	and	summoned	his	astrologer	Sharaf	to	his
tent.	Together	they	studied	the	sky	charts,	trying	to	work	out	from	the	positions	of	the	planets	the	most
auspicious	day	for	the	wedding.	It	was	soon,	Sharaf	said,	putting	down	his	astrolabe	–	just	three	weeks
away.	That	decided	Humayun.	He	would	halt	his	advance	into	Rajasthan	until	after	the	wedding	so	that
there	would	be	time	to	prepare.	Though	he	was	landless	and	throneless,	his	union	with	Hamida	must
not	 be	 a	 mean	 affair.	 They	 were	 not	 humble	 camp	 followers	 to	 be	 wedded	 and	 bedded	 in	 between
marches	but	an	emperor	and	his	empress.

Hamida	was	sitting	motionless	beneath	layers	of	shimmering	golden	gauze,	the	veils	held	in	place	by
a	 chaplet	 of	 pearls	 interwoven	 with	 yellow	 cat’s-eyes	 symbolising	 Ferghana	 and	 emeralds	 for
Samarkand	 that	 Gulbadan	 had	 fashioned	 for	 her.	 As	 the	 mullahs	 finished	 intoning	 their	 prayers,
Humayun	took	Hamida’s	hennaed	hand	in	his	and	felt	a	responsive	tremor.	As	his	vizier	Kasim	led	the
cries	of	‘Hail	Padishah’,	Humayun	and	Hamida	rose	and	he	led	her	from	the	wedding	tent	to	his	own
where	the	marriage	feast	was	spread.
The	 guests	 were	 few	 –	 Kasim,	 Zahid	 Beg,	 Ahmed	 Khan	 and	 some	 other	 officers	 and	 Khanzada,
Gulbadan	and	their	women.	If	he’d	still	been	emperor	in	Agra,	there	would	have	been	thousands	of
guests.Trays	of	wedding	gifts	–	rare	spices,	silks	and	jewels	–	would	have	been	spread	before	him.	In
the	 courtyard	 would	 have	 been	 living	 gifts	 –	 bejewelled	 elephants	 with	 gilded	 tusks	 and	 strings	 of
high-spirited,	 high-stepping	 horses.	 Obsequious	 rajas	 would	 have	 queued	 to	 make	 obeisance	 and
when	night	fell	soft	music	would	have	risen	over	the	scented	courtyards	and	brilliant	fireworks	would
have	turned	the	dark	sky	back	to	day.
But	 glancing	 at	 Hamida,	 seated	 beside	 him	 on	 a	 red	 velvet	 cushion	 and	 all	 but	 one	 of	 her	 veils
thrown	back	so	that	he	could	see	her	perfect	features	–	the	soft	curve	of	her	cheek,	the	rise	and	fall	of
her	breasts	beneath	the	thin	fabric	of	her	robe	–	Humayun	felt	close	to	true	happiness.	He	had	made
love	to	many	women,	taking	pleasure	in	his	prowess	as	a	lover,	but	the	emotions	welling	inside	him
were	new	to	him.	Not	even	for	Salima	had	he	ever	felt	such	tenderness.
As	the	feast	ended,	the	dishes	were	cleared	and	all	but	their	personal	attendants	left,	Humayun	felt
shy	 as	 a	 boy	 about	 to	 know	 a	 woman	 for	 the	 first	 time.	 While	 his	 own	 servants	 undressed	 him	 and
wrapped	 a	 silk	 robe	 around	 him,	 Hamida’s	 women	 led	 her	 into	 the	 bridal	 bedchamber	 created	 by
scarlet	leather-covered	wooden	screens	interlaced	with	hide	thongs	that	stretched	across	the	far	end	of
the	tent.	Humayun	paused	then	ducked	beneath	the	stiff	brocade	hung	over	the	gap	between	two	of	the
screens.
Hamida	 was	 not	 yet	 ready.	 He	 found	 himself	 half	 averting	 his	 gaze	 as	 her	 smiling	 women
undressed	her,	combed	the	long,	shining	fall	of	dark	hair	and	then	laid	her	beneath	a	thin	coverlet	on
the	rosewater-scented	bed.	As	the	women	withdrew,	he	could	hear	their	soft	laughter.	He	felt	awkward,
confused.	He	had	been	so	determined	to	have	Hamida,	so	certain	that	this	was	the	woman	with	whom
his	future	must	be	linked,	but	she	was	virtually	a	stranger.	They’d	never	even	been	alone	together.	The
few	 words	 they’d	 exchanged	 had	 always	 been	 in	 the	 presence	 of	 others.	 Unbidden,	 the	 thought
returned	that	she’d	accepted	him	only	because	she’d	felt	she	had	no	choice.	It	made	him	nervous	of
approaching	her.
‘Humayun	.	.	.	’	Hamida’s	soft	voice	at	last	broke	the	silence.	Turning,	he	saw	she	had	raised	herself
on	her	left	elbow	and	was	half	sitting	up.	Her	right	hand	was	extended	towards	him.	Slowly	he	came
nearer	 and	 kneeling	 by	 the	 bed	 took	 her	 hand	 and	 touched	 the	 fingers	 to	 his	 lips.	 As	 she	 raised	 the
coverlet,	 he	 rose	 and	 slipped	 in	 beside	 her.	 Her	 body	 felt	 warm,	 and	 slowly,	 almost	 reverently,	 he
touched	her	face	then	entwined	his	hands	in	the	spilled	mass	of	her	hair.	Her	eyes,	looking	up	at	him,
were	 wide	 but	 trusting.	 Gently	 pulling	 her	 closer,	 he	 began	 to	 explore	 her	 slender	 body	 from	 the
delicacy	of	her	small	shoulders	to	the	satin	curve	of	her	hips.	Caressing	her	breasts	with	his	tongue	he
felt	 the	 hardening	 of	 her	 small,	 pink	 nipples	 and	 her	 response	 gave	 him	 courage.	 A	 thin	 sheen	 of
sweat	was	forming	on	Hamida’s	body	as	his	hands	gently	probed	her.	Her	eyes	were	closed	but	her

lips	were	parted	and	from	them	came	a	gasp.
Containing	 his	 own	 impatience,	 Humayun	 waited	 until	 he	 judged	 she	 was	 ready	 then,	 carefully
easing	 himself	 on	 top,	 began	 gently	 to	 enter	 her.	 As	 he	 thrust	 harder	 he	 felt	 the	 tightness	 in	 her
yielding	and	glanced	anxiously	down	but	saw	pleasure	not	pain	in	her	half-closed	eyes.	As	he	pushed
deeper	a	passionate	tenderness	for	this	woman,	a	desire	to	protect	her	at	all	costs,	filled	his	soul.	She
was	his	now	and	would	be	as	long	as	they	both	lived.
They	woke,	bodies	intertwined,	as	in	the	half-light	of	the	tent	their	attendants	came	to	rouse	them,
bringing	 ewers	 of	 warmed	 water.	 It	 was	 Hamida	 who	 waved	 them	 away	 but	 once	 they	 were	 alone
again,	she	sat	silent	and	still.
‘What	is	it,	Hamida?	Have	I	offended	you	.	.	.	?’
She	looked	at	him	a	little	shyly	and	shook	her	head.
‘What	then?’
‘These	past	days	I	was	afraid	.	.	.	’
‘Of	what?’
‘That	you	wanted	me	for	your	wife	shocked	me.	I	feared	I	might	displease	you	.	.	.	disappoint	you.
But	 last	 night	 your	 tenderness,	 the	 joy	 you	 brought	 me,	 soothed	 away	 my	 anxieties	 .	 .	 .	 ’	 She	 was
looking	 at	 him	 now	 with	 shining	 eyes.	 He	 began	 to	 speak	 but	 she	 placed	 a	 fingertip	 on	 his	 mouth.
‘You	know	that	a	seer ’s	blood	runs	in	my	veins.	But	there	is	something	you	don’t	know.	Sometimes,	I
too	have	the	gift	to	see	into	the	future.	Last	night,	I	dreamed	that	very	soon	I	will	conceive	a	child	.	.	.	a
son.	Do	not	ask	me	how	I	know,	only	believe	me	that	it	is	so.’
Humayun	took	her	in	his	arms	again.	‘I	will	rebuild	the	Moghul	empire	and	we	will	be	great,	you
and	I	and	our	son,’	he	whispered	as	slowly,	tenderly	he	began	to	make	love	to	her	again.

Chapter	12
Into	the	Desert
‘Majesty,	my	scouts	have	seized	a	lone	traveller	in	the	bazaar	of	a	small	mud-walled	town	a	few	miles
to	the	south.	Clearly	a	stranger	from	his	dress	and	his	accent,	he	had	been	asking	the	stallholders	and
anyone	else	who	would	listen	whether	you	and	your	column	had	passed	this	way.	I	had	him	brought
straight	to	me	in	case	he	was	a	spy,’	said	Ahmed	Khan.
‘If	 he	 is	 a	 spy,	 he’s	 not	 a	 very	 good	 one.	 He	 wasn’t	 apparently	 making	 much	 attempt	 to	 keep	 his
mission	secret.’
Ahmed	Khan	did	not	share	Humayun’s	smile.	‘He	claims	to	have	come	from	Kabul,	Majesty,	and
says	he	must	see	you.	If	his	purpose	is	genuine,	I	fear	from	his	face	he	has	no	good	news	to	relate.’
‘Fetch	him	here	at	once.’
‘Yes,	Majesty.’
A	shadow	of	foreboding	crept	over	Humayun.	A	few	minutes	later,	through	the	neat	rows	of	tents,
he	saw	Ahmed	Khan	returning	and,	behind	him,	two	of	his	scouts	escorting	a	tall	young	man.	As	they
drew	nearer,	Humayun	saw	how	travel-stained	the	new	arrival’s	clothes	were.	He	was	gaunt	and	the
purple	shadows	beneath	his	eyes	betrayed	his	exhaustion.
‘Majesty.’	He	prostrated	himself	on	the	ground	in	the	formal	salute	of	the	korunush.
‘Rise.	Who	are	you	and	what	is	it	you	wish	to	tell	me?’
The	 newcomer	 got	 slowly	 to	 his	 feet.	 ‘I	 am	 Darya,	 the	 son	 of	 Nasir,	 one	 of	 the	 commanders	 of
your	garrison	in	Kabul.’
Humayun	remembered	Nasir	–	a	tough	old	Tajik	chieftain	who	had	served	him	loyally	for	many
years.	He	had	been	well	known	in	the	camp	for	his	voracious	sexual	appetite	and	for	the	number	of
children	he	had	had	by	his	four	wives	–	eighteen	sons	and	sixteen	daughters	–	and	many	others	by	his
numerous	concubines.	Humayun	had	not	seen	Nasir	for	many	years	and	the	only	children	of	his	he
had	met	had	been	just	that.
‘So	that	I	may	know	you	are	who	you	claim	to	be,	tell	me	how	many	children	your	father	has.’
Darya	smiled	a	slightly	melancholy	smile.	‘No	one	knows,	but	he	had	thirty-four	of	us	by	his	first
four	wives	and	after	one	of	them	–	not	my	mother,	I	give	thanks	–	died	last	year,	he	married	a	fifth
who	 bore	 him	 a	 thirty-fifth.	 However,	 as	 a	 token	 of	 my	 identity	 I	 have	 here	 in	 a	 pouch	 beneath	 my
garments	the	wolf-tooth	necklace	my	father	wore.’	He	made	to	delve	beneath	his	dusty	garments.
‘No	need.	I	believe	you	are	Nasir ’s	son.	What	is	the	news	from	Kabul?	Speak	.	.	.	’
‘Bad,	Majesty,	the	worst	I	could	bring.	Soon	after	your	grandfather	reached	Kabul	he	had	a	sudden
seizure.	 He	 lost	 much	 of	 the	 power	 of	 speech	 and	 could	 scarcely	 use	 his	 limbs.	 He	 appeared	 to	 be
slowly	regaining	his	strength	but	.	.	.	’
‘What	happened?’	Humayun	broke	in,	though	in	his	heart	he	knew.
‘He	died	in	his	sleep,	Majesty,	nearly	four	months	ago.	His	attendants	found	him	in	the	morning,	a
peaceful	expression	on	his	face.’
Humayun	looked	down,	trying	to	take	in	that	Baisanghar	had	gone.

‘There	 is	 more,	 Majesty	 .	 .	 .	 Your	 half-brothers	 Kamran	 and	 Askari,	 who	 had	 established
themselves	 in	 Peshawar	 at	 the	 foot	 of	 the	 Khyber	 Pass,	 learned	 of	 your	 grandfather ’s	 illness	 and
hoped	 to	 take	 advantage	 of	 it.They	 brought	 troops	 up	 through	 the	 pass	 to	 Kabul.	 By	 the	 time	 they
reached	it	your	grandfather	was	dead.	Without	warning,	they	attacked	the	citadel	and	despite	all	my
father	and	others	could	do	quickly	overran	it.’
For	a	moment	Humayun	forgot	his	grief	for	Baisanghar.	‘Kabul	has	fallen	to	Kamran	and	Askari?’
‘Yes,	Majesty.’
‘Impossible!	 How	 could	 my	 half-brothers	 have	 raised	 an	 army	 sufficient	 for	 such	 a	 task	 so
quickly?’
‘They	had	gold,	Majesty,	from	raiding	the	caravans.	We	heard	that	they	captured	a	group	of	wealthy
Persian	 merchants	 and	 used	 their	 gold	 to	 bribe	 some	 of	 the	 mountain	 clans.	 Pashais,	 Barakis	 and
Hazaras	 and	 members	 of	 other	 lawless	 breeds	 came	 in	 great	 numbers	 to	 fight	 for	 them.	 But	 in	 the
event	 there	 was	 little	 fighting	 in	 Kabul.	 Your	 half-brothers	 bribed	 one	 of	 our	 captains	 to	 open	 the
gates	of	the	citadel	to	them.’
Though	the	camp	was	bathed	in	sunlight,	the	world	seemed	suddenly	dark	and	chill	to	Humayun.
‘My	father	.	.	.	’	Darya’s	voice	shook	a	little,	‘my	father	was	hit	between	the	shoulder	blades	by	a
Pashai	battleaxe	as	he	tried	to	run	up	from	the	gate	to	warn	the	defenders	that	we	had	been	betrayed
and	that	the	enemy	had	gained	entrance.	He	managed	to	crawl	into	a	doorway	where	I	found	him.	His
last	words	to	me	were	that	I	must	escape	from	Kabul	.	.	.	that	I	must	take	his	necklace	to	establish	my
identity	and	find	you	and	tell	you	what	had	happened	and	.	.	.	that	he	was	sorry	.	.	.	he	had	done	his	best
to	defend	Kabul	but	he	had	failed	you.	I	sought	you	first	at	Sarkar	but	you	had	already	left.	Since	then
I	have	been	searching	for	you.	I	thought	I	would	be	too	late,	that	you	would	have	already	heard	.	.	.	’
‘No,	I	knew	nothing	of	this.’	Humayun	struggled	to	compose	himself.	‘Your	father	did	not	fail	me	–
he	gave	his	life	for	me	and	I	will	not	forget	it.	You	have	made	an	epic	journey.	Now	you	must	rest	but
we	will	talk	more	later.	I	must	learn	as	much	as	possible	about	what	has	happened.’
As	Ahmed	Khan’s	men	led	Darya	away,	Humayun	gestured	to	Jauhar	that	he	wished	to	be	alone	and
entered	 his	 tent.	 As	 he	 splashed	 his	 face	 with	 water	 he	 scarcely	 felt	 the	 cold	 drops	 trickle	 down	 his
face.	Conflicting	emotions	–	some	personal,	some	political,	but	none	pleasant	–	jostled	in	his	mind.
Initially	simple	grief,	the	knowledge	that	he	would	never	see	his	grandfather	again,	was	uppermost.
Humayun	closed	his	eyes	as	he	recalled	his	father ’s	vivid	stories	of	Baisanghar	in	his	youth,	of	how
as	 a	 young	 cavalry	 captain	 he	 had	 brought	 Babur	 Timur ’s	 ring,	 still	 crusted	 with	 the	 blood	 of	 its
previous	wearer;	how	Baisanghar	had	sacrificed	his	right	hand	out	of	loyalty	to	Babur	and	opened	the
gates	of	Samarkand	to	him.	Humayun’s	mother	Maham	too	had	had	her	own	fund	of	stories	of	her
father	 –	 less	 violent	 but	 even	 more	 fond.	 Now	 Baisanghar	 was	 dead	 without	 ever	 knowing	 that
Humayun	had	married.	But	at	least	he	had	died	before	Kamran	and	Askari	had	attacked	Kabul.
At	the	thought,	another	emotion	harsher	than	grief	took	over	–	fury	with	his	half-brothers.	If	they
were	 brought	 before	 him	 now	 all	 Babur ’s	 urgings	 of	 mercy	 wouldn’t	 deter	 him	 from	 hacking	 off
their	 traitorous	 heads	 and	 kicking	 them	 through	 the	 dust.	 Instinctively,	 Humayun	 pulled	 his	 dagger
from	his	sash	and	sent	it	spinning	across	the	tent	to	embed	itself	in	a	round	red	cushion	that	he	wished
was	Kamran’s	throat.
Kamran	had	seen	his	opportunity	for	a	throne	and	with	Askari	as	his	willing	accomplice	had	taken
it.	 While	 they	 held	 Kabul,	 it	 would	 be	 almost	 impossible	 for	 Humayun	 to	 regain	 Hindustan.	 It	 had
long	 been	 obvious	 that	 family	 unity,	 pride	 in	 the	 Moghul	 dynasty,	 mattered	 less	 to	 them	 than	 the
chance	 to	 enrich	 themselves	 and,	 so	 it	 seemed,	 above	 all	 to	 damage	 him.Why	 could	 they	 never	 see
how	destructive	their	vindictive	jealousy	was,	what	a	risk	it	was	to	them	all?

Humayun	paced	about,	trying	to	order	his	thoughts.	He	must	think	and	behave	rationally	not	only
for	 his	 own	 sake	 but	 for	 his	 wife	 and	 their	 unborn	 child.	 The	 thought	 of	 Hamida	 for	 a	 moment
lightened	 his	 mood.	 Despite	 the	 dangers	 surrounding	 them,	 these	 past	 weeks	 had	 been	 among	 the
happiest	 he	 had	 ever	 known,	 especially	 when,	 a	 month	 ago,	 Hamida	 had	 told	 him,	 eyes	 more
luminous	than	ever,	that	her	dream	had	been	correct.	She	was	indeed	pregnant.	Perhaps	the	knowledge
that	he	might	soon	have	an	heir	was	what	made	Kamran	and	Askari’s	latest	betrayal	especially	hard	to
bear.	By	striking	at	him,	they	were	also	striking	at	his	wife	and	unborn	child	–	those	Humayun	loved
most	in	the	world.
And	if	Hamida	was	indeed	carrying	a	boy,	as	she	believed,	the	loss	of	Kabul	made	the	child’s	future
all	the	more	precarious.	Even	if	the	baby	survived	the	dangerous	times	Humayun	knew	were	coming,
instead	 of	 inheriting	 a	 great	 empire	 he	 might	 be	 heir	 to	 almost	 nothing	 –	 reduced	 as	 some	 of	 his
ancestors	had	been	to	the	life	of	a	petty	warlord	constantly	feuding	with	his	relations	over	a	few	mudwalled	villages	and	a	few	flocks	of	sheep	while	another	dynasty	ruled	Hindustan.
This	could	not,	must	not	happen.	He	would	not	let	it.	Humayun	dropped	to	his	knees	and	out	loud
swore	an	oath.
‘Whatever	 it	 takes,	 however	 long	 the	 struggle,	 I	 will	 regain	 Hindustan.	 I	 am	 ready	 to	 spill	 every
drop	of	blood	to	do	so.	I	will	bequeath	my	sons	and	their	sons	a	greater	empire	than	even	my	father
dreamed	of.	I,	Humayun,	swear	it.’

The	desert	heat	was	growing	unbearable	as	Humayun	and	his	troops	drew	nearer	to	Marwar.	Every
day	seemed	hotter	and	the	going	harder.	The	sour-breathed	camels	with	their	great	splayed	feet	were
managing	but	the	horses	and	pack	mules	were	sinking	up	to	their	hocks	in	the	burning	drifting	sand.
Every	 day,	 animals	 collapsed	 from	 dehydration	 and	 exhaustion,	 legs	 feebly	 twitching	 and	 parched
tongues	lolling	through	cracked	lips.	Humayun	ordered	his	men	to	slit	the	throats	of	those	too	sick	to
go	on	and	add	their	meat	to	the	cooking	pot,	but	he	also	commanded	them	to	collect	their	blood.	In
Timur ’s	day,	warriors	had	survived	out	on	the	steppes	by	drinking	the	blood	of	their	animals.
Glancing	 over	 his	 shoulder,	 he	 watched	 the	 enclosed	 litter	 bearing	 Hamida	 appear	 out	 of	 the
silvery,	shimmering	haze,	carried	on	the	shoulders	of	six	of	his	strongest	men.	Khanzada,	Gulbadan
and	 the	 other	 women	 were	 on	 ponies	 but	 he	 was	 doing	 everything	 possible	 to	 help	 the	 pregnant
Hamida	travel	as	smoothly	as	possible.	Grass	and	aromatic	herbs	and	roots	had	been	stuffed	into	the
sides	 of	 the	 litter ’s	 bamboo	 frame	 and	 every	 hour	 or	 so	 attendants	 dampened	 it	 with	 a	 little	 of	 the
precious	water	to	provide	her	with	some	fragrant	relief	from	the	heat.	Even	so,	her	face	was	very	thin
and	 the	 dark	 circles	 in	 the	 almost	 translucent	 skin	 beneath	 her	 eyes	 showed	 that	 pregnancy	 had	 not
come	easily	to	her.	Often	she	felt	nauseous	and	found	it	hard	to	eat.
Watching	her	litter	draw	nearer,	the	fear	he	might	lose	her	gripped	Humayun	anew.	He	was	doing
all	he	could	to	protect	her	and	bring	her	to	safety	but	hazards	were	all	around.	Snakes	and	scorpions
lurked.	They	were	even	vulnerable	to	the	bands	of	brigands	who	infested	the	desert,	now	that	he	had
so	few	troops	left	–	barely	one	thousand.	At	the	news	of	the	fall	of	Kabul,	many	of	his	men	had	simply
melted	away.
God	 willing,	 soon	 they	 should	 reach	 the	 outskirts	 of	 the	 kingdom	 of	 Marwar	 and	 find	 sanctuary
there.	 Raja	 Maldeo’s	 messages	 of	 support	 –	 brought	 on	 the	 most	 recent	 occasion	 by	 the	 same

ambassador	 who	 had	 sought	 Humayun	 out	 in	 Sarkar	 –	 were	 growing	 ever	 more	 fervent	 the	 nearer
Humayun	 and	 his	 column	 approached.	 Nevertheless	 he	 wished	 Maldeo	 would	 send	 practical	 help	 –
food,	water	and	fresh	horses	would	be	more	welcome	than	fine	promises.	But	Humayun	hesitated	to
ask	for	such	things.	He	was	coming	to	Marwar	as	the	raja’s	guest	and	ally,	not	as	a	beggar.
According	to	the	red	leather-bound	volume	in	which	Kasim	dutifully	recorded	daily	the	diminution
of	 their	 supplies,	 just	 as	 he	 had	 done	 when	 Babur	 had	 been	 besieged	 in	 Samarkand,	 they	 still	 had
enough	 corn,	 dates	 and	 other	 dried	 fruit	 to	 sustain	 them.	 However,	 it	 was	 many	 days	 since	 they’d
tasted	fresh	food	other	than	that	from	the	carcasses	of	the	exhausted	or	diseased	animals,	if	that	could
indeed	 be	 called	 fresh.	 At	 first	 they’d	 bought	 produce	 from	 the	 villages	 along	 the	 way.	 It	 was	 the
mango	season	and	the	flesh	of	the	delicate,	orange,	sweet-scented	fruits	hanging	in	clusters	among	the
glossy,	dark	green	leaves	was	one	of	the	few	things	Hamida	could	be	tempted	to	eat.	But	six	days	ago
they	had	passed	the	last	settlement	–	a	tangle	of	mud-brick	houses	clustered	around	a	well	–	and	the
desert	had	engulfed	them.	Ahmed	Khan’s	scouts,	riding	ahead	in	the	cool	of	the	moonlit	nights,	had
reported	no	signs	of	further	habitation.
The	 worst	 problem,	 though,	 was	 lack	 of	 water,	 which	 his	 officers	 now	 rationed	 carefully.	 Three
nights	 ago,	 two	 of	 his	 men	 had	 drunk	 strong	 spirits	 instead.	 Then,	 with	 their	 thirsts	 heightened	 and
their	passions	unleashed,	they	had	fought	for	possession	of	a	waterskin	containing	a	few	mouthfuls	of
fetid	liquid	and	one	had	died,	slashed	across	the	throat	by	the	other ’s	dagger.	Humayun	had	ordered
the	survivor	to	be	beheaded,	but	he	had	seen	the	sullen	challenge	in	the	eyes	of	the	soldiers	drawn	up
to	 witness	 the	 punishment.	 Indiscipline	 and	 insubordination	 were	 as	 dangerous	 as	 any	 attacks	 from
desert	raiders	.	.	.
His	own	horse	was	suffering	badly.	Its	once	glossy	coat	was	flecked	with	dried	sweat	and	sand	and
it	 stumbled	 frequently.	 Humayun	 squinted	 around	 him.	 The	 glare	 from	 the	 orange	 ball	 of	 the	 sun
deadened	the	landscape,	flattening	out	the	rolling	dunes	and	reducing	everything	to	a	dispiriting,	eyesearing	monotony	with	nothing	to	catch	the	mind’s	attention	or	freshen	the	spirit.	To	spare	his	horse
for	a	while,	Humayun	slipped	down,	and	taking	the	reins	in	his	left	hand,	plodded	by	its	side.
Suddenly	Humayun	heard	shouts	somewhere	up	ahead.	Shading	his	eyes,	he	tried	to	see	what	was
happening	towards	the	front	of	the	column	some	three	or	four	hundred	yards	away	but	the	sun	dazzle
made	it	impossible.	‘Find	out	what’s	going	on,’	he	shouted	to	Jauhar.	But	before	Jauhar	could	kick	his
mount	forward,	a	general	stampede	began.	Pack	animals	that	had	been	trailing	listlessly	behind	were
suddenly	rushing	frenziedly	past,	no	longer	finding	the	sand	an	obstacle	in	their	headlong	charge.	It
could	only	be	water,	Humayun	realised,	and	his	heart	soared.
Remounting	his	own	horse	which	was	now	whinnying	with	excitement,	he	rode	forward.	He	would
bring	Hamida	a	cup	of	cool	water	with	his	own	hands.	But	as	he	drew	nearer,	chaos	met	his	eyes.	At
first	it	was	hard	to	see	what	was	happening	in	the	midst	of	so	many	flailing,	pushing	bodies	–	human
and	animal	–	half	hidden	by	a	few	squat	dusty-looking	palm	trees.	Then	he	saw	the	raised	mud-brick
sides	 of	 what	 looked	 like	 a	 cluster	 of	 small	 wells	 and	 to	 one	 side,	 a	 small	 spring	 seeping	 out	 in
rivulets	over	pebbles	into	the	sand.	Men	were	already	fighting	over	the	hide	buckets	that	they’d	hauled
out	of	the	wells,	spilling	the	precious	water.
The	pack	animals	they	should	have	been	tending	were	also	acting	half	crazed.	Camels	were	spitting
and	frenziedly	lashing	out	with	their	feet.	One	man	was	kicked	so	hard	in	the	guts	that	he	fell	to	the
ground	 and	 was	 instantly	 trampled.	 Humayun	 saw	 his	 head	 crushed,	 brains	 and	 blood	 spilling
sickeningly	 out	 on	 to	 the	 sand	 where	 camp	 dogs	 at	 once	 began	 to	 lick	 them	 up.	 Mules	 were	 baring
their	 yellow	 teeth	 and	 biting	 at	 one	 another	 as	 they	 all	 struggled,	 regardless	 of	 the	 loads	 on	 their
backs,	to	get	to	the	spring.

Humayun	was	beside	himself	with	fury.	What	were	his	officers	thinking	of	.	.	.	?	But	as	he	kicked
his	 horse	 forward,	 determined	 to	 restore	 order,	 he	 saw	 that	 officers	 as	 well	 as	 men	 were	 in	 that
tangled,	 heaving	 mêlée.	 He	 shouted	 to	 them	 but	 they	 didn’t	 hear.	 Forcing	 his	 way	 further	 into	 the
crush,	 waving	 Alamgir	 above	 his	 head	 and	 roaring	 rebukes,	 he	 at	 last	 made	 his	 presence	 felt.
Shamefaced,	his	officers	gave	up	their	own	fight	for	water	and	began	trying	to	control	their	men.
Humayun’s	thoughts	now	were	for	Hamida	and	the	other	women	towards	the	back	of	the	column.
Turning	 his	 horse,	 he	 galloped	 back	 over	 the	 hot	 sand	 but	 was	 relieved	 to	 find	 them	 still	 quietly
making	their	way,	protected	by	his	guards.	They	had	been	so	far	to	the	back	of	the	line	that	they	had
not	become	caught	up	in	the	stampede.	Riding	up	to	Hamida’s	litter	he	opened	the	curtains	and	peered
inside.	Her	smile,	radiant	in	the	shadowy	interior,	told	him	all	was	well	and	he	breathed	more	easily.
It	took	over	an	hour	to	restore	calm	but	by	then	half	a	dozen	men	were	dead,	trampled	in	the	crush
or	slain	by	others	determined	to	get	to	the	water	first.	Others	were	writhing	on	the	ground,	clutching
bellies	 swollen	 with	 water	 and	 screaming	 for	 relief.	 Several	 were	 vomiting	 water	 and	 bile	 and
babbling	 incoherently.	 It	 was	 like	 a	 vision	 from	 hell	 and	 Humayun	 turned	 his	 gaze	 away.	 He	 could
only	be	grateful	that	his	enemy	Sher	Shah	was	too	far	away	to	know	the	depths	to	which	he	and	his
little	band	had	fallen.
His	spirits	didn’t	rise	again	until	three	days	later	when,	across	the	pale	orange	drifts	of	sand,	the
jagged	 shape	 of	 a	 high,	 rocky	 outcrop	 emerged	 from	 the	 hazy	 horizon.	 Atop	 it,	 perched	 like	 an
eagle’s	nest,	was	a	fortress	–	the	stronghold	of	the	Raja	of	Marwar.	It	must	still	be	some	fifteen	or
twenty	 miles	 away,	 Humayun	 reckoned,	 but	 soon	 he	 would	 be	 able	 to	 bring	 Hamida,	 Khanzada	 and
Gulbadan	within	the	safety	of	its	walls.	It	would	be	a	welcome	return	to	sanity	and	safety	after	their
precarious	desert	journey.	He	despatched	a	scout	at	once	bearing	his	greetings	to	Maldeo.
The	distance	must	have	been	shorter	than	Humayun	had	calculated	because	the	scout	returned	next
day,	 bringing	 a	 detachment	 of	 the	 raja’s	 special	 guard	 in	 orange	 robes	 and	 steel	 breastplates,
splendidly	mounted	on	matching	black	stallions.	The	warriors’	flowing	black	hair	was	knotted	on	the
back	of	their	heads	almost	like	women’s,	but	there	was	nothing	feminine	about	these	lean,	hawk-nosed
muscular	men	with	their	gleaming	spears.
With	Kasim	and	Zahid	Beg	by	his	side,	Humayun	rode	forward.	The	Rajput	leader	dismounted	and
kneeling	 before	 Humayun	 touched	 his	 forehead	 briefly	 to	 the	 hot	 sand.	 ‘Maldeo,	 Raja	 of	 Marwar
sends	his	greetings,	Majesty.	He	has	been	waiting	for	you	for	many	days	and	has	sent	me	and	my	men
to	escort	you	over	the	last	miles	of	your	journey.’
‘I	am	grateful	to	the	raja	for	his	care.	The	sooner	we	reach	Marwar	the	better	–	my	men	are	weary.’
‘Of	course,	Majesty.	If	we	ride	now,	we	can	reach	the	fortress	by	sunset	where	my	master	will	make
you	and	your	entourage	comfortable.’
As	 Humayun	 watched	 the	 Rajput	 ride	 back	 to	 his	 men,	 he	 wondered	 what	 impression	 his	 ragged
little	army	had	made.	Looking	at	his	men	through	a	stranger ’s	eyes	he	saw	not	a	proud	Moghul	army
but	 a	 small	 band	 of	 grimy	 men	 riding	 broken	 beasts,	 the	 once-bright	 blades	 of	 the	 weapons	 slung
from	their	saddles	–	the	swords	and	double-headed	axes	–	dull	from	disuse.	Many	had	thrown	their
round,	metal-bound	shields	away	rather	than	be	burdened	with	them	in	the	heat	and	their	arrow	cases
were	nearly	empty.	There	had	been	no	time	or	opportunity	to	find	wood	and	fletch	new	arrows	since
they	 had	 ridden	 into	 the	 desert.	 Only	 Humayun’s	 musketeers	 –	 well	 drilled	 by	 Zahid	 Beg	 –	 looked
capable	of	putting	up	a	fight.	But	all	that	would	change	when	he	reached	Marwar.	He	still	had	some
money	left	to	re-equip	his	men	and	recruit	more,	and	the	raja	himself	would	supply	him	with	troops.
That	night,	beneath	a	sky	flushed	a	vibrant	pinky-orange	as	the	sun	went	down,	Humayun	led	his
small	column	through	the	winding	streets	of	Marwar	towards	Raja	Maldeo’s	massive	fortress	on	top

of	the	steep	promontory	rising	behind	the	town.	Between	the	last	of	the	wood	and	mud-brick	houses
and	the	outcrop	–	which	looked	perhaps	a	hundred	and	fifty	feet	high	–	was	an	area	of	open	land	with
a	small	spring	over	to	the	right.	Beyond	the	spring	were	rows	of	tents	and	brushwood	piled	ready	for
burning.
‘The	camp	that	has	been	prepared	for	your	men,	Majesty,’	said	the	Rajput	commander.
Riding	on,	Humayun	approached	an	arched	gatehouse	close	to	the	foot	of	the	outcrop.	Drums	of
welcome	beaten	by	unseen	hands	boomed	as,	with	his	bodyguards,	senior	commanders	and	courtiers
and	 the	 women,	 he	 passed	 through.	 On	 the	 other	 side	 of	 the	 gate,	 a	 steep	 but	 wide	 ramp-like	 road
twisted	 sharply	 to	 the	 left	 and,	 following	 the	 rock’s	 natural	 contours,	 ascended	 the	 outcrop.	 Slowly
Humayun’s	tired	horse	plodded	up	the	ramp,	snorting	with	the	effort,	emerging	at	the	top	on	to	a	wide
stone	plateau.	Ahead	was	a	girdle	of	crenellated	walls	that	enclosed	much	of	the	top	of	the	outcrop.
The	 only	 entrance	 was	 through	 a	 two-storey	 gatehouse	 beyond	 which	 Humayun	 could	 see	 further
walls.
The	 gatehouse,	 with	 a	 carving	 of	 a	 Rajput	 warrior	 on	 a	 rearing	 horse	 above	 the	 lintel,	 looked
ancient	 –	 far	 older	 than	 the	 Agra	 fort	 or	 even	 the	 citadel	 of	 Kabul,	 Humayun	 thought	 as	 he	 rode
beneath	 the	 raised	 metal	 grille.	 How	 many	 generations	 of	 Rajput	 warriors	 had	 swept	 though	 it	 and
down	the	steep	ramp	to	do	battle	in	furtherance	of	their	warrior	code?	Of	all	the	peoples	in	Hindustan,
these	 Rajputs	 were	 surely	 closest	 to	 the	 Moghuls	 themselves	 –	 a	 warrior	 breed	 for	 whom	 fighting,
honour,	glory,	conquest	were	as	natural	as	the	warm	milk	they	had	sucked	at	their	mothers’	breasts.
But	then	his	curious	eyes	fell	on	something	he	didn’t	understand.	Along	each	side	of	the	gatehouse’s
deep	inner	walls	was	a	series	of	small	blood-red	handprints.
‘What	are	those?’
The	 Rajput	 commander	 replied	 with	 what	 seemed	 to	 Humayun	 a	 deep	 pride.	 ‘Those	 are	 the
handprints	of	the	royal	women	of	Marwar	made	by	them	on	their	way	to	their	deaths.	When	a	Rajput
woman’s	husband	dies	or	is	killed	in	battle	it	is	her	duty	to	renounce	life	and	join	him	on	his	funeral
pyre.	 These	 marks	 that	 you	 see	 here	 are	 the	 last	 living	 acts	 of	 these	 women	 on	 their	 way	 to	 be
consumed	in	the	flames.’
Humayun	had	heard	similar	stories	before.	Babur	had	told	him	that	his	Hindu	subjects	called	this
practice	 sati	 and	 that	 the	 women	 were	 not	 always	 willing.	 Babur	 had	 witnessed	 a	 young	 widow	 –
barely	more	than	sixteen	–	struggling	and	being	drenched	in	oil	and	thrown	bodily	into	the	flames.
Her	screams	had	been	terrible	and	she	had	died	before	Babur ’s	men	could	intervene.
As	if	he	could	read	Humayun’s	mind,	the	Rajput	continued,	‘It	is	a	point	of	honour	for	our	women	.
.	.	And	if	ever	we	suffer	such	terrible	defeat	in	battle	that	it	seems	our	women	might	be	seized	by	our
enemy,	the	most	senior	Rajput	princess	leads	the	other	noblewomen	–	dressed	in	their	finery	and	best
jewels	as	if	for	a	wedding	–	in	the	ceremony	of	jauhar.	A	great	fire	is	lit	and	the	women	leap	joyfully
into	 the	 flames	 rather	 than	 face	 dishonour.’	 The	 man	 was	 smiling	 as	 if	 at	 a	 vision	 of	 something
wonderful.
Humayun	turned	his	eyes	from	those	red	imprints,	whether	made	in	ecstasy	or	despair.	Instinctively,
he	felt	that	however	devoted	to	her	husband,	however	dire	the	circumstances,	a	woman	had	her	own
existence	 to	 think	 of,	 her	 own	 obligations	 –	 to	 herself,	 to	 her	 children	 if	 she	 was	 a	 mother,	 and	 to
those	 around	 her.	 Khanzada’s	 experiences	 had	 shown	 that	 an	 indomitable	 spirit	 could	 endure	 and
emerge,	not	unscathed,	but	stronger.The	thought	of	Hamida	being	burned	alive	if	he	died	chilled	his
blood.	Perhaps	the	difference	was	that	the	Rajputs	as	Hindus	believed	in	reincarnation	and	that	to	die
with	honour	meant	being	reborn	with	greater	status,	whereas	he	believed	that	one	must	make	the	most
of	the	single	life	one	had	on	earth.

Directly	ahead,	in	the	centre	of	a	fresh	curtain	of	walls	was	a	passageway	about	six	foot	wide	with	a
near	 right-angled	 bend	 at	 its	 centre	 –	 no	 doubt	 designed	 to	 prevent	 an	 enemy	 storming	 through	 in
great	 numbers.	 It	 gave	 on	 to	 a	 large	 parade	 ground	 where	 a	 group	 of	 war	 elephants	 were	 being
drilled.	Opposite	was	yet	another	set	of	walls,	again	with	only	one	narrow	gateway.	These	concentric
walls,	so	different	from	the	design	of	a	Moghul	fortress,	reminded	Humayun	of	the	intricate	boxes
within	boxes	that	the	slant-eyed	merchants	from	Kashgar	sold	in	the	markets	of	Kabul.
But	 this	 third	 set	 of	 walls	 was	 the	 last.	 Passing	 through,	 Humayun	 entered	 a	 large	 rectangular
courtyard	–	the	heart	of	Maldeo’s	fortress.	In	the	centre	stood	an	imposing	building	more	solid	than
beautiful.	It	was	impossible	to	tell	how	many	storeys	it	had	–	small	arched	windows	pierced	its	walls
seemingly	at	random.	Attached	to	one	side	was	a	wide,	sturdily	built	tower	with,	on	the	very	top,	an
elegant	stone	pavilion.
Humayun	reined	in	his	horse	and	looked	critically	around	him.	His	host	should	have	been	there	to
welcome	him.	But	just	then	came	a	blast	from	an	unseen	trumpeter	and	a	procession	of	orange-clad
Rajput	warriors	filed	out	of	the	palace’s	carved	central	doorway	and	formed	up	in	two	lines	on	either
side	 of	 Humayun.	 Raja	 Maldeo	 followed,	 a	 tall,	 powerfully	 built	 man	 in	 belted	 orange	 robes	 that
swept	the	ground,	dark	hair	tightly	bound	beneath	a	turban	of	cloth	of	gold	flashing	with	diamonds.
Hand	on	breast,	he	advanced	towards	Humayun	and	bowed	his	head.
‘Greetings,	Majesty.	Welcome	to	Marwar.’
‘I	thank	you	for	your	hospitality,	Raja	Maldeo.’
‘Your	ladies	will	be	given	apartments	near	those	of	the	royal	women	of	my	house	as	is	our	Rajput
custom.	 Rooms	 for	 yourself	 and	 your	 courtiers	 and	 commanders	 have	 been	 prepared	 in	 the	 Hawa
Mahal	–	the	Palace	of	the	Winds.’	Maldeo	gestured	towards	the	tower.	‘Yours	will	be	in	the	pavilion	at
the	very	top	where	the	breezes	blow	through.’
‘Again,	I	thank	you.	And	tomorrow	we	will	talk,	Maldeo.’
‘Of	course.’

Humayun	 woke	 next	 day	 to	 feel	 a	 warm	 breeze	 stirring	 the	 gauze	 curtains	 around	 the	 soft	 bed	 on
which,	exhausted,	he	had	collapsed	into	a	long	dreamless	sleep.	For	a	few	moments	he	just	lay	there,
giving	himself	up	to	relief	and	satisfaction	that	he	had	brought	his	family	and	his	men	to	a	safe	haven.
For	 a	 while	 at	 least	 they	 could	 all	 rest,	 and	 most	 important	 of	 all	 Hamida	 would	 have	 the	 care	 and
comfort	she	needed.	Humayun	got	up	and	stepping	out	on	to	the	wide	balcony	found	himself	gazing
down	 the	 sweep	 of	 cliff	 that	 fell	 sheer	 to	 the	 sandy	 plain	 below.	 The	 sun,	 already	 high	 in	 the	 sky,
seemed	tinged	with	crimson	around	the	edges,	like	the	flesh	of	the	blood	orange.
After	 the	 hardships	 of	 the	 past	 few	 weeks’	 journey,	 the	 desert	 held	 no	 charms	 for	 Humayun.
Turning	away,	he	summoned	Jauhar	to	fetch	Kasim,	Zahid	Beg	and	his	other	commanders.Word	of
this	 must	 have	 reached	 Maldeo	 because	 even	 before	 Humayun’s	 men	 arrived,	 the	 raja’s	 servants
brought	 great	 brass	 trays	 piled	 with	 fruit,	 nuts	 and	 gilded	 sweetmeats,	 and	 golden	 ewers	 of	 chilled
sherbet.	 They	 were	 still	 eating	 and	 drinking	 when	 Maldeo	 himself	 appeared.	 He	 was	 more	 soberly
dressed	today	in	pantaloons	and	tunic	of	dark	purple	and	a	curved	dagger	hanging	in	a	plain	leather
scabbard	from	the	thin	metal	chain	around	his	lean	waist.
‘I	trust	you	slept	well,	Majesty.’

‘Better	than	for	many	weeks.	Join	us,	please.’	Humayun	gestured	to	the	orange	silk	cushion	next	to
him.
Maldeo	 made	 himself	 comfortable	 and	 helped	 himself	 to	 a	 gilded	 almond.	 For	 the	 sake	 of
politeness,	 Humayun	 decided	 he	 must	 wait	 a	 while	 before	 raising	 the	 subject	 of	 Sher	 Shah,	 but	 his
host	was	less	squeamish.
‘You	have	not	made	this	long	and	arduous	journey	simply	to	drink	sherbet	with	me.’	Maldeo	leaned
forward.	 ‘Let	 us	 be	 frank.	 We	 face	 a	 common	 enemy.	 If	 left	 unchecked	 Sher	 Shah	 could	 destroy	 us
both.	He	must	be	defeated.You	already	know	that	he	has	insulted	me	by	threatening	to	invade	Marwar,
but	in	recent	weeks	he	has	given	me	yet	further	cause	to	wish	to	see	his	head	in	the	dust.’
‘How	so?’
‘He	has	dared	to	ask	for	my	daughter	in	marriage.	The	blood	of	thirty	kings	of	Rajasthan	runs	in
her	veins	–	I’ll	not	give	her	to	the	thieving	offspring	of	a	common	horse	trader.’	Maldeo’s	eyes	were
narrow	slits	and	his	tone	was	laced	with	venom.
‘I	have	few	men	left	but	if	you	will	give	me	an	army	and	ride	with	me,	others	will	take	heart	and
follow.	Like	the	Moghuls,	your	people	are	of	warrior	blood.	Together	we	can	sweep	Sher	Shah	and
his	dregs	into	the	gutters.And	I	promise	you	this,	Maldeo	–	when	I	am	again	on	my	throne	in	Agra,
you	will	be	the	first	I	shall	recompense.’
‘Whatever	is	in	my	power	I	will	do	–	not	for	reward	but	from	respect	and	honour,	both	for	my	own
heritage	and	for	yours.’
‘I	know,	Maldeo.’	Humayun	took	the	raja	by	the	shoulders	and	embraced	him.

Eight	 weeks	 later,	 Humayun	 watched	 the	 raja	 and	 his	 escort	 ride	 out	 of	 the	 fortress,	 disappearing
across	the	dry	plains	in	the	 direction	 of	 the	 desert	 city	 of	 Jaisalmer	 where	 Maldeo	 planned	 to	 raise
more	troops	for	the	campaign	against	Sher	Shah.	In	the	gathering	dusk,	the	shrill	cries	of	the	raja’s
pet	 peacocks	 pierced	 the	 cooling	 air	 as	 they	 sought	 a	 roost	 for	 the	 night	 on	 the	 battlements.	 As	 he
contemplated	the	future	Humayun	felt	more	relaxed	than	for	many	months.	Maldeo	was	an	attentive
host.	 A	 day	 seldom	 passed	 without	 either	 some	 entertainment	 –	 camel	 races,	 elephant	 fights	 or
displays	 of	 fire-eating	 and	 martial	 Rajput	 dances	 –	 or	 the	 presentation	 of	 a	 gift.	 Only	 yesterday,
Maldeo	had	sent	him	a	jewelled	bridle	and	Hamida	a	necklace	of	translucent	amber	beads.	Pleasing
though	 this	 was	 as	 a	 sign	 of	 Maldeo’s	 friendship,	 far	 more	 important	 was	 that	 he	 and	 the	 raja	 had
nearly	 finished	 planning	 their	 campaign	 against	 Sher	 Shah.	 Soon	 Humayun	 would	 be	 riding	 at	 the
head	of	an	army	again.
‘Majesty	.	.	.	’	He	turned	to	see	one	of	Hamida’s	attendants,	Zainab,	kneeling	before	him.	The	girl
was	 badly	 disfigured	 by	 a	 birthmark	 that	 covered	 the	 right	 half	 of	 her	 thin	 little	 face	 and	 when	 her
mother	had	died	of	a	fever	during	the	harsh	journey	to	Marwar,	her	father,	a	foot	soldier	with	other
children	to	feed,	had	left	her	to	fend	for	herself.	Touched	by	her	misfortunes,	Hamida	had	taken	her
as	her	attendant.
‘What	is	it?’
Still	 kneeling,	 Zainab	 spoke	 rapidly.	 ‘Majesty,	 her	 imperial	 highness	 asks	 you	 to	 come	 to	 her	 as
soon	as	possible.’
Humayun	smiled.	He	had	been	planning	to	visit	Hamida	tonight.	Now	that	they	were	in	comfort	and

safety	 and	 Hamida	 was	 feeling	 well	 again,	 his	 mind	 turned	 frequently	 to	 the	 joys	 of	 love-making,
although	 with	 Hamida’s	 rapidly	 swelling	 belly	 he	 must	 soon	 learn	 to	 curb	 his	 passion	 for	 her.
Nothing	must	damage	the	child.	But	when,	finally,	Zainab	lifted	her	eyes	to	his,	they	looked	troubled
and	he	knew	something	was	wrong.
Without	 stopping	 to	 question	 Zainab,	 Humayun	 swiftly	 descended	 two	 floors	 to	 the	 passage
connecting	the	Hawa	Mahal	to	where	Hamida	and	her	women	had	been	given	apartments	 adjoining
those	of	Maldeo’s	women.	Ignoring	the	members	of	his	bodyguard	posted	by	the	sandalwood	doors
leading	to	Hamida’s	rooms,	Humayun	himself	pushed	them	open	and	strode	in.
‘Humayun	.	.	.	’	Hamida	ran	to	him	and	putting	her	arms	round	his	neck	clung	to	him.	Her	body	was
trembling	and	he	could	feel	her	hectic,	shuddering	heartbeat	beneath	her	thin	silk	tunic.
‘What	is	it?	The	child	.	.	.	’
Hamida	said	nothing	but	waited	until	the	doors	had	closed	and	they	were	alone.	Stepping	back	from
Humayun,	 she	 folded	 her	 hands	 protectively	 over	 her	 belly.	 ‘Our	 son	 is	 safe	 inside	 me	 .	 .	 .	 for	 the
moment	 at	 least.	 But	 if	 we’re	 not	 careful	 we	 may	 all	 soon	 be	 dead.’	 Her	 voice	 was	 low	 and	 as	 she
spoke	she	glanced	around	as	if	eavesdroppers	might	be	concealed	behind	the	fluttering	hangings.
‘What	do	you	mean?’
Hamida	came	close	to	Humayun	again.	‘I	have	learned	that	the	raja	has	never	been	our	friend.	He
has	always	planned	to	betray	us.	Even	now	he	is	riding	to	a	secret	meeting	with	envoys	sent	by	Sher
Shah	from	Agra	at	a	fortress	deep	in	the	desert.	His	story	about	going	to	raise	troops	in	Jaisalmer	was
just	a	blind	to	conceal	his	true	purpose.’
‘But	he	is	my	ally	and	my	host	and	has	treated	us	with	honour.	We’ve	been	in	his	power	these	past
two	months.	He	could	have	killed	us	a	hundred	times	.	.	.	’	Humayun	stared	at	Hamida,	worried	that
her	pregnancy	had	addled	her	wits.
‘All	that	has	saved	us	so	far	is	the	raja’s	greed	–	he	has	been	negotiating	his	price.	Now	he	has	gone
in	person	to	question	Sher	Shah’s	envoys	to	satisfy	himself	that	all	his	demands	will	be	met.	As	soon
as	he	returns	.	.	.	sooner	if	he	sends	a	messenger	ahead	of	him	.	.	.	he	will	have	us	murdered.’
Hamida’s	face	was	taut	with	fear	though	her	voice	was	calm.	He	took	her	hand,	feeling	its	marble
coldness.
‘How	do	you	know	all	this?’
‘A	woman	–	her	name	is	Sultana	–	came	to	me	from	the	raja’s	haram.	She	is	one	of	our	people	–	an
Afridi	from	the	mountains	of	Kabul.	After	her	father	was	killed	at	Panipat,	she	and	her	mother	joined
a	caravan	returning	to	Kabul	but	as	they	were	attempting	to	cross	the	Indus	brigands	attacked	them.
Sultana	and	the	other	young	women	were	taken	to	be	sold	in	the	bazaars.	She	was	a	great	beauty.	One
of	the	raja’s	nobles	bought	her	and	sent	her	to	Maldeo	as	a	gift.’
‘What	else	did	this	woman	tell	you?’
‘That	 in	 his	 heart	 he	 despises	 the	 Moghuls.	 He	 thinks	 us	 barbarian	 raiders	 with	 no	 right	 to
Hindustan.The	story	about	Sher	Shah	wishing	to	marry	the	raja’s	daughter	is	a	lie.	As	soon	as	Maldeo
knew	we	were	definitely	on	our	way	here,	he	wrote	to	Sher	Shah	gloating	that	he	would	soon	have	us
in	his	power	and	asking	what	Sher	Shah	would	give	him	in	return	for	us.	For	some	time	there	was
silence.	 But	 finally	 –	 two	 days	 ago	 according	 to	 Sultana	 –	 envoys	 from	 Sher	 Shah	 reached	 the
outskirts	 of	 the	 kingdom	 of	 Marwar	 and	 sent	 a	 message	 to	 Maldeo	 telling	 him	 of	 Sher	 Shah’s
response.What	Sher	Shah	said	.	.	.	it	was	terrible	.	.	.	’	For	the	first	time	her	voice	seemed	to	fail	her.
Humayun	caught	her	against	him	and	held	her	close.	‘Hamida,	go	on.	You	must	tell	me	everything	.
.	.	’
After	a	moment	Hamida	continued,	face	against	his	chest,	voice	muffled.	‘Sher	Shah	has	promised

Maldeo	that	if	the	raja	sends	him	your	head	.	.	.	and	the	unborn	child	I	am	carrying	.	.	.	he	will	reward
him	 not	 only	 with	 money	 and	 jewels	 but	 with	 new	 lands	 and	 cities	 that	 he	 will	 hold	 independent	 of
Sher	Shah.	When	Sultana	told	me	this	I	was	sick	.	.	.	for	a	while	I	couldn’t	think,	but	I	knew	I	must	be
strong	.	.	.	for	us	and	for	the	son	I	carry	.	.	.	’
As	 he	 thought	 of	 Maldeo’s	 smiling	 face,	 of	 all	 his	 smooth-tongued	 lies,	 such	 anger	 and	 disgust
took	 hold	 of	 Humayun	 that	 he	 felt	 he	 might	 choke	 with	 rage.	 ‘Does	 Maldeo	 mean	 to	 accept	 Sher
Shah’s	offer?’	he	managed	to	ask.
‘Sultana	 says	 the	 raja	 is	 cautious.	 That	 is	 why	 he	 has	 summoned	 the	 envoys	 to	 meet	 him	 in	 the
fortress	in	the	desert	–	so	he	can	question	them	himself.	But	if	he	believes	Sher	Shah	means	what	he
says,	Maldeo	will	not	hesitate	to	have	us	killed.	That	is	why	as	soon	as	he	left	this	evening,	Sultana
found	a	way	to	come	to	me	.	.	.	’
‘Are	you	sure	this	Sultana	is	to	be	trusted?	Why	should	she	run	such	a	risk	for	us?’
‘She	hates	Maldeo	for	his	callous	treatment	of	her	.	.	.	He	calls	her	his	savage	from	the	steppes.	But
her	reasons	go	deeper	than	that.	I	saw	her	distress	as	she	laid	her	hand	on	my	belly	.	.	.	She	told	me
that	when	she	bore	Maldeo	a	son,	he	said	the	child	was	not	worthy	to	be	reared	in	the	palace	and	he
sent	it	away.	She	does	not	even	know	if	he	is	alive.	She	came	to	me	for	the	sake	of	our	unborn	child
and	for	mine	as	a	mother,	I’m	sure	of	it.	She	called	herself	my	blood-sister	and	I	believed	her.’
Humayun	 gently	 released	 Hamida.	 With	 her	 anxious	 eyes	 upon	 him,	 a	 cold	 determination	 was
replacing	 the	 heat	 of	 his	 rage	 at	 Maldeo’s	 treachery	 and	 violation	 of	 all	 the	 rules	 of	 honour	 and
hospitality	at	the	heart	of	the	Rajput	code.	If	he	was	to	save	the	lives	of	his	family	and	his	men	he	must
push	emotion	aside	and	focus	his	mind	on	one	thing	only	–	survival.
‘I	 promise	 you	 this	 –	 no	 harm	 will	 come	 to	 you	 or	 our	 child.	 I	 married	 you	 to	 make	 you	 my
empress	and	that	is	what	you	will	be.	And	our	son	will	be	emperor	after	me.	Maldeo’s	wickedness	will
not	alter	this.’
At	Humayun’s	words,	Hamida	drew	herself	up.	‘What	must	we	do?’
‘Have	you	talked	about	this	to	anyone?	Khanzada	or	Gulbadan?’
‘Not	to	anyone.’
‘What	does	your	waiting	woman	Zainab	know?’
‘Only	that	my	meeting	with	Sultana	had	upset	me	.	.	.	’
‘Can	you	summon	Sultana	again?’
‘Yes.	Her	rooms	are	close	by	and	she	is	free	to	move	about	the	palace.’
‘I	must	leave	you	for	a	while	for	appearance’s	sake.	Some	of	Maldeo’s	commanders	are	to	eat	with
me	and	my	officers	to	discuss	the	campaign	against	Sher	Shah.	I	must	do	nothing	to	arouse	suspicion.
But	summon	Sultana	two	hours	from	now	and	I	will	join	you	as	soon	as	I	can.	I	must	see	this	woman
for	myself.’	Bending,	he	kissed	Hamida’s	full	soft	lips.	‘Courage,’	he	whispered,	‘all	will	be	well	.	.	.	’
As	 soon	 as	 he	 was	 able	 but	 a	 little	 later	 than	 he’d	 hoped,	 Humayun	 hurried	 again	 to	 his	 wife’s
apartments.	The	light	from	hundreds	of	wicks	burning	in	brass	diyas	and	the	torches	in	sconces	on	the
walls	 softened	 the	 harsh	 stone	 outlines	 of	 the	 place	 Humayun	 had	 thought	 of	 as	 a	 refuge	 but	 –	 if
Sultana	was	speaking	the	truth	–	was	not	only	a	prison	but	a	place	of	execution.	All	during	the	meal	–
though	 appearing	 polite	 and	 attentive	 to	 Maldeo’s	 men	 –	 he	 had	 been	 turning	 over	 and	 over	 in	 his
mind	what	he	should	do	and	he	had	formed	a	plan,	bold	and	desperate	.	.	.
‘Majesty.’	The	woman	knelt	before	him	as	he	entered	Hamida’s	chamber.
‘Rise.’	 Humayun	 appraised	 her	 closely	 as	 she	 stood	 up	 and	 waited,	 hands	 folded,	 before	 him.
Sultana	 was	 about	 thirty	 years	 old	 but	 –	 with	 her	 pale,	 high-cheekboned	 face,	 typical	 of	 the	 Afridi
people	–	still	beautiful	and	her	black	hair	was	untouched	by	silver.	Her	clear,	hazel	eyes	were	fixed

anxiously	on	his	face	as	if	wondering	whether	she	was	standing	up	to	his	scrutiny.
‘The	empress	has	told	me	your	story.	If	it	is	true	we	owe	you	a	great	debt	.	.	.	’
‘It	is	true,	Majesty.	I	swear	it.’
‘Why	should	the	raja	have	confided	his	plans	in	you?’
‘He	 has	 spoken	 openly	 of	 them	 in	 the	 haram	 –	 out	 of	 conceit	 and	 a	 desire	 to	 gloat.	 Even	 as	 you
were	approaching	over	the	desert,	Majesty,	when	he	knew	you	had	little	food	or	water	left,	he	said	he
was	tempted	to	attack	you.	But	it	pleased	him	better	to	lure	you	on	with	soft	words	and	fine	promises.
He	is	a	master	of	deceit	and	enjoys	spinning	a	complex	web	.	.	.	he	wanted	to	make	sure	he	had	you
fully	in	his	power.’	Sultana’s	voice	trembled,	‘Truly,	Majesty,	he	is	a	monster	.	.	.	’
The	horror	and	revulsion	that	he	read	in	Sultana’s	eyes	told	Humayun	that	she	was	no	liar.
‘God	sent	you	here	to	save	us,’	he	said	as	Sultana	fell	silent.
‘I	hope	so,	Majesty.	I	will	do	all	I	can	to	help	you.’
‘Then	let	me	tell	you	my	plan	.	.	.	Since	I	have	been	Maldeo’s	guest	I	have	been	out	hawking	several
times.	What	could	be	more	natural	than	that	I	should	wish	to	do	so	again?	Tomorrow,	just	as	dawn	is
breaking,	I	and	my	courtiers	and	commanders	lodged	here	in	the	palace	will	dress	as	if	for	a	day’s
chase.	I	will	order	litters	prepared	for	our	women,	saying	that	I	wish	them	too	to	enjoy	a	day’s	sport.
They	 have	 accompanied	 me	 before	 so	 there	 should	 be	 nothing	 strange	 in	 this.	 Once	 we	 have
descended	from	the	fortress	we	will	head	east	into	the	desert.
‘But	of	course,	I	also	need	to	get	my	forces	away.	Tonight	I	will	send	my	attendant	Jauhar	to	Zahid
Beg,	 who	 commands	 our	 camp	 outside	 the	 town	 below.	 Jauhar	 often	 carries	 messages	 from	 me	 to
Zahid	Beg,	so	again	there	should	be	nothing	to	rouse	suspicion.	He	will	tell	Zahid	Beg	to	say	nothing
to	 the	 men	 at	 present	 but	 that	 early	 tomorrow	 morning	 he	 must	 lead	 them	 out	 westward,	 making	 it
look	as	if	they	are	going	on	a	military	exercise.	They	will	have	to	leave	much	of	the	camp	equipment
–	including	our	cannon	–	behind	but	that	cannot	be	helped.	Once	out	of	sight	of	Marwar,	they	are	to
circle	round	and	rejoin	the	rest	of	us.’	Humayun	paused.	‘What	do	you	think,	Sultana?	Will	the	guards
permit	me	and	my	entourage	to	ride	from	the	fortress	in	Maldeo’s	absence?’
‘If	it	looks	as	if	you	are	going	hunting,	they	can	have	no	reason	to	prevent	you.	As	far	as	I	know,
Maldeo	has	given	no	orders	for	you	to	be	kept	within	the	fortress	–	he	would	not	wish	to	do	anything
to	make	you	suspect.’
‘But	 you,	 Sultana?’	 Hamida	 touched	 the	 woman’s	 arm.	 ‘You	 must	 come	 with	 us	 .	 .	 .	 it	 would	 be
dangerous	for	you	to	remain.	Maldeo	will	guess	what	you	have	done	.	.	.	’
To	Humayun’s	surprise,	Sultana	shook	her	head.
‘But	this	is	your	chance	to	rejoin	your	own	people	.	.	.	’
‘After	what	has	happened	to	me	here	at	the	hands	of	Maldeo,	I	can	never	go	back	.	.	.	That	part	of
my	life	is	over.	But	when	I	see	his	ambition,	his	greed	thwarted,	that	will	be	my	reward	.	.	.	’	A	sad	but
also	triumphant	smile	briefly	lit	her	face.	‘And	I	doubt	he	will	suspect	me	.	.	.	he	does	not	think	I	have
the	brains	or	the	courage	to	do	what	I	have	done	.	.	.	’
‘I	will	never	forget	you,	my	blood-sister.	And	when	I	am	empress	in	Agra,	I	will	send	for	you	.	.	.
and	if	you	wish	to	come	you	will	be	treated	with	the	greatest	honour.’	Hamida	kissed	Sultana’s	cheek.
‘May	God	protect	you.’

The	sky	was	only	just	paling	to	the	east	when	Humayun,	dressed	in	hunting	clothes	like	those	around
him,	rode	slowly	through	the	concentric	walls	towards	the	gatehouse	that	was	the	only	exit	from	the
fortress.	A	fine	black	hawk	given	him	by	Maldeo	was	on	his	wrist,	bright	eyes	concealed	beneath	a
jewelled	and	tufted	cap	of	yellow	leather.	Behind	him,	surrounded	by	Kasim	and	his	other	courtiers
and	commanders,	were	the	litters	carrying	Hamida,	Khanzada,	Gulbadan	and	the	rest	of	the	women.
After	leaving	Hamida	last	night	he	had	gone	straight	to	his	aunt	and	his	sister	to	tell	them	of	the	peril
and	of	what	they	must	do.	True	Moghul	princesses,	they	had	at	once	grasped	the	situation	and	obeyed
him	calmly	and	unquestioningly.
Humayun’s	blood	was	pumping	as	hard	as	if	he	was	riding	into	battle	as	he	led	his	party	nearer	to
the	gatehouse.	In	the	soft	morning	light	he	could	see	that	the	metal	grille	was	still	lowered.	His	eyes
flicked	left	and	right,	seeking	any	sign	of	an	ambush.	Though	he	had	believed	every	word	Sultana	had
said,	 he	 had	 been	 deceived	 before	 in	 this	 place.	 Also,	 Sultana	 herself	 might	 have	 been	 betrayed,
perhaps	by	an	enemy	within	the	haram	curious	about	her	meetings	with	the	Moghul	empress.	But	all
seemed	as	it	should	be.	No	arrow	tip,	no	musket	protruding	from	a	slit	in	the	gatehouse.	Just	the	usual
guards.With	seeming	casualness,	Humayun	gestured	to	Jauhar	who	called	out	in	ringing	tones,	‘Raise
the	gate.	His	Imperial	Majesty	wishes	to	go	hawking.’	The	captain	of	the	guard,	a	tall	man	in	orange
tunic	and	turban,	hesitated.	Humayun	felt	sweat	trickle	down	between	his	shoulder	blades	and	glanced
down	at	Alamgir,	hanging	at	his	side.	Across	his	back	was	a	full	arrow	case.	But	there	was	no	need
for	force.	After	barely	a	second	or	two,	the	Rajput	captain	shouted,	‘Raise	the	grille.’
The	men	above	the	gate	began	turning	the	windlass	to	draw	up	the	thick	black	chains	from	which
the	 grille	 was	 suspended.	 Agonisingly	 slowly	 –	 or	 so	 it	 seemed	 to	 Humayun	 –	 creaking	 and
shuddering	the	heavy	iron	grille	rose.	With	every	foot,	so	too	did	Humayun’s	hopes,	though	he	kept
his	expression	distant	and	slightly	bored.
Even	when	the	grille	was	fully	up,	Humayun	did	not	hurry	but	spent	a	moment	or	two	adjusting	the
hawk’s	 leather	 hood.	 Then,	 with	 a	 wave	 of	 his	 hand,	 he	 and	 his	 little	 entourage	 trotted	 forward.
Slowly,	so	as	still	not	to	rouse	suspicion,	they	rode	down	the	steep	ramp	curving	along	the	side	of	the
outcrop	 that	 only	 a	 few	 weeks	 ago	 they	 had	 ridden	 up	 with	 such	 high	 hopes,	 out	 of	 the	 ceremonial
arched	gatehouse	at	its	foot	and	then	through	the	quiet	streets	of	the	town	where	the	people	still	slept.
Soon	they	were	heading	eastward,	the	seeping	golden	light	of	the	rising	sun	before	them,	and	into	the
sandy	wastes	that	though	so	hostile	were	their	best	protection.

Chapter	13
Demon	of	the	Sands
Humayun	signalled	the	small	scouting	party	with	whom	he	had	ridden	ahead	of	his	main	column	to
halt.	He	swallowed	a	single	mouthful	of	the	precious	water	in	the	leather	bottle	at	his	side	then	patted
his	 horse’s	 neck,	 which	 was	 flecked	 with	 creamy	 patches	 of	 sweat.	 Around	 him,	 the	 blistering,
shimmering	desert	stretched	away,	silent,	endless	and	all-engulfing.
‘Over	there,	look!’	shouted	one	of	the	scouts	–	no	more	than	a	youth	–	hands	cupped	around	his
eyes	against	the	glare.	‘To	the	left!’
Humayun	scanned	the	horizon	and	caught	his	breath	as	he	made	out	the	indistinct	shape	of	first	one
and	then	two	palm	trees	emerging	from	the	heat	haze	and	then,	a	little	further	along,	what	might	just
be	the	glint	of	sunlight	on	water.	‘I	see	palm	trees	and	what	could	be	a	river.	How	about	you,	Ahmed
Khan?’
‘Yes.	 Perhaps	 that	 patch	 of	 trees	 shelters	 the	 settlement	 of	 Balotra	 we’ve	 heard	 about.	 That	 water
could	be	the	Luni	river	flowing	down	to	the	Rann	of	Kutch.’
‘How	much	do	we	know	about	Balotra?’
‘Very	little.	By	the	look	of	it,	it’s	still	fifteen	miles	or	so	off.	I’ll	send	some	of	these	scouts	ahead,
Majesty,	if	you	wish,	while	we	wait	for	the	main	party	and	make	camp	here	for	the	night.’
‘Do	so,	and	have	the	scouts	make	sure	there	are	none	of	Maldeo’s	men	waiting	in	ambush	in	the
settlement.’
Luck	had	so	far	been	on	Humayun’s	side.	Despite	many	anxious	glances	over	his	shoulder,	during
these	past	weeks	there	had	been	no	sign	of	pursuers	from	Marwar.	After	rendezvousing	with	his	main
force,	Humayun	had	turned	north	for	a	while	in	a	calculated	bid	to	deceive	Maldeo.	Over	four	days’
hard	 march,	 with	 everyone’s	 nerves	 on	 edge,	 pickets	 posted	 all	 around	 the	 column,	 scouts	 ranging
even	 further	 afield	 and	 deliberately	 abandoning	 detritus	 –	 old	 equipment	 and	 even	 wagons	 –	 to
convince	any	of	Maldeo’s	scouts	who	came	that	way	that	he	really	was	heading	north,	Humayun	had
circled	 eastward.	 Then	 he	 had	 turned	 south,	 parties	 of	 men	 following	 on	 foot	 in	 the	 early	 stages	 to
disguise	their	tracks	by	sweeping	the	sand	with	bundles	of	brushwood.
Only	 once	 had	 Humayun	 thought	 he	 could	 see	 riders	 on	 the	 horizon,	 but	 they’d	 proved	 nothing
more	 threatening	 than	 a	 herd	 of	 goats	 that	 must	 have	 wandered	 from	 their	 village	 looking	 for	 the
small,	 bitter	 berries	 that	 grew	 on	 the	 few	 scrubby	 bushes.	 He	 had	 tried	 to	 picture	 Maldeo’s
consternation	on	returning	from	his	secret	meeting	with	Sher	Shah’s	emissaries	to	find	his	‘guests’
gone,	 but	 his	 thoughts	 had	 quickly	 turned	 to	 how	 best	 to	 find	 a	 refuge	 for	 his	 family	 and	 his	 men.
They	could	not	meander	endlessly	through	the	desert.	The	suffocating	heat	and	shortage	of	fresh	food
and	clean	water	could	kill	just	as	easily	as	Rajput	arrows	and	musket	balls.
And	all	the	time	he	had	been	worrying	about	Hamida.	At	night	he	heard	her	tossing	and	turning,
unable	to	sleep,	perhaps	tormented	by	images	of	their	capture	by	Maldeo	and	the	murder	of	herself
and	 her	 unborn	 child.	 But	 she	 never	 complained	 and	 brushed	 off	 his	 enquiries	 with	 the	 simple
comment	 that	 it	 was	 indigestion	 –	 something	 she	 was	 told	 all	 pregnant	 women	 suffered	 from.	 Last

night	she	had	said	to	him,	‘We	will	tell	our	son	what	it	was	like	–	how	we	protected	him	in	even	the
worst	of	places	–	and	he	will	take	strength	from	the	story	of	how	we,	and	he,	survived,	won’t	he?’
Humayun	had	pulled	her	close	and	hugged	her	in	admiration	of	her	bravery	and	stoicism.
‘Majesty.’	 Ahmed	 Khan	 approached	 Humayun	 as,	 next	 day,	 outside	 his	 tent	 he	 took	 his	 morning
meal	–	a	small	cup	of	water,	a	piece	of	unleavened	bread	and	some	dried	apricots	so	hardened	by	the
sun	 that	 they	 threatened	 to	 crack	 his	 teeth.	 ‘My	 scouts	 have	 just	 returned.	 It	 is	 Balotra,	 about	 twenty
miles	ahead.’
‘They	saw	no	sign	of	Maldeo	or	his	men?’
‘No.’
‘How	many	people	live	there?’
‘Perhaps	two	hundred,	just	herdsmen	and	farmers.’
‘You	have	done	well,Ahmed	Khan.	Lead	us	there.’	Humayun	finished	his	meagre	meal	with	greater
appetite	than	he	had	begun	it.	If	Balotra	was	indeed	what	it	seemed,	they	could	find	refuge	there	while
he	planned	his	next	move.
As	he	and	his	men	approached	the	settlement	later	that	day,	Humayun	saw	that	it	was	no	more	than	a
few	dozen	mud-brick	houses	clustered	on	the	flat	banks	of	the	river	whose	orange-brown	waters	were
very	 low	 and	 flowing	 sluggishly,	 as	 was	 to	 be	 expected	 during	 the	 hot	 season.	 But	 there	 was	 water
enough	for	the	villagers	to	grow	crops	whose	green	shoots	poked	through	the	soil	in	the	cultivated
strips	along	the	riverbank.
‘Jauhar.	Go	ahead	and	find	the	headman.	Tell	him	we	are	travellers	who	mean	his	people	no	harm
and	 that	 we	 wish	 to	 pitch	 our	 camp	 along	 the	 riverbank	 beyond	 their	 fields.	 Also,	 say	 that	 we	 need
food	and	fuel	for	which	we	will	pay	–	and	a	house	where	our	women	can	find	shade	and	rest.’

Standing	on	the	roof	of	a	single-storey	mud-brick	house,	Humayun	gazed	down	towards	the	river.	It
was	September	now	and	the	heat	was	no	longer	quite	so	relentless.	Balotra	had	been	a	good	place	to
halt	–	a	safe	place	–	tucked	away	in	this	sparsely	inhabited	region.	According	to	Simbu,	the	elderly,
almost	blind	village	headman,	Balotra	and	the	handful	of	other	settlements	sprinkled	along	the	Luni
river	 were	 of	 little	 interest	 to	 the	 regional	 rulers	 or	 warlords,	 who	 left	 them	 in	 peace.	 Only	 the
seasons	governed	the	villagers’	quiet	lives.
Humayun	 had	 not	 told	 Simbu	 who	 he	 was	 and	 the	 headman,	 filmy	 eyes	 turned	 on	 him,	 had	 not
asked.	In	fact,	he’d	asked	few	questions	and	seemed	to	have	accepted	Humayun’s	story	that	he	was	a
commander	 a	 long	 way	 from	 his	 own	 lands	 whose	 column	 needed	 rest	 and	 water.	 Nevertheless,
Humayun	had	sensed	Simbu’s	anxiety	that,	despite	his	assurances	and	his	money,	he	and	his	soldiers
might	bring	trouble	on	his	people.The	old	man	would	clearly	be	relieved	when	they	rode	away.
Humayun	 was	 also	 anxious	 to	 be	 gone	 –	 it	 was	 too	 dangerous	 to	 stay	 in	 one	 place	 for	 long,
however	remote	–	but	where	should	he	go?	He	couldn’t	afford	a	false	move.	All	his	instincts	–	now
that	he	seemed	to	have	shaken	off	Maldeo	–	were	to	go	northward	to	the	Khyber	Pass	and	on	towards
Kabul	to	raise	the	mountain	clans	who	owed	him	their	loyalty	and	attempt	to	take	back	the	city	before
Kamran	and	Askari	became	even	more	entrenched	there.	Until	he	had	re-established	his	authority	in
Kabul	and	removed	the	threat	to	his	rear	he	could	not	even	think	of	challenging	Sher	Shah.

Going	 north	 would,	 of	 course,	 take	 him	 close	 to	 Marwar	 again	 but	 his	 other	 options	 were	 also
risky	without	the	benefit	of	returning	him	swiftly	to	Kabul.	If	he	ventured	east,	he	soon	would	enter
the	Rajput	kingdoms	of	Mewar	and	Amber	whose	rulers,	for	all	he	knew,	might	have	joined	forces
with	Maldeo.	Though	the	Rajputs	were	notorious	for	warring	with	one	another	they	might	well	unite
against	 a	 man	 they	 believed	 was	 their	 common	 enemy	 –	 or	 if	 the	 bribe	 from	 Sher	 Shah	 was	 great
enough.
If	Humayun	went	south	he	would	enter	Gujarat,	now	in	Sher	Shah’s	hands,	while	the	way	due	west
also	had	its	hazards.	According	to	Simbu,	across	the	Luni	river	lay	a	further	desert,	stretching	nearly
three	hundred	miles	westward	all	the	way	to	Sind	–	a	treacherous	place	of	wild	winds	and	quicksands
that	 could	 bring	 death	 to	 the	 unwary.	 It	 had	 been	 known	 to	 swallow	 up	 whole	 caravans	 making	 for
Umarkot,	the	ancient	oasis	at	its	heart.	Several	of	Balotra’s	villagers	had	made	the	journey	to	trade	in
Umarkot	 and	 knew	 a	 safe	 route	 but,	 Simbu	 had	 cautioned	 Humayun	 with	 a	 grave	 shake	 of	 his	 old
head,	it	was	not	a	journey	to	be	undertaken	lightly.
Humayun’s	ignorance	of	events	in	the	wider	world	made	it	even	harder	to	take	a	decision.	He	knew
nothing	of	what	Sher	Shah	was	doing	or	Maldeo	or	indeed	his	half-brothers.	Where	was	Hindal	now?
With	Kamran	and	Askari?	And	were	his	elder	half-brothers	attempting	further	conquests	to	add	to	the
lands	they	had	already	stolen?	Knowing	the	extent	of	Kamran’s	ambition	he	would	not	be	surprised.
His	 half-brother	 must	 know	 that	 at	 some	 point	 Humayun	 would	 come	 after	 him	 and	 he	 would	 be
strengthening	his	position	as	much	as	he	could.	Neither	wise	old	Kasim	nor	his	aunt	Khanzada	with
all	her	experience	had	anything	to	suggest	and	even	his	elderly	astrologer	Sharaf	seemed	baffled.	The
stars	 that	 shone	 with	 such	 clear	 and	 piercing	 beauty	 in	 the	 night	 skies	 offered	 Humayun	 no
illumination.	He	knew	that,	just	as	his	father	Babur	had	done	when	the	world	turned	its	back	on	him,
he	would	have	to	rely	on	his	own	inner	resources	to	find	his	answers.
The	 sound	 of	 a	 woman	 singing	 distracted	 Humayun	 from	 his	 thoughts.	 Low	 and	 sweet,	 it	 was	 a
voice	he	knew	well	–	Hamida’s.	At	least	she	was	healthy,	thriving	even,	belly	round	as	a	watermelon.
The	child	would	be	big,	she	would	tell	Humayun,	placing	his	hand	on	her	stomach	so	that	he	could
feel	the	vigorous	kicks.	Descending	the	narrow,	wooden	ladder	down	from	the	roof	he	went	in	search
of	her.
She	 was	 sitting	 in	 the	 shade	 of	 a	 fig	 tree	 spinning	 woollen	 thread	 on	 a	 wheel	 she	 had	 borrowed
from	 the	 headman’s	 wife,	 with	 her	 waiting	 woman	 Zainab	 holding	 the	 skein	 beside	 her.	 Seeing
Humayun,	Hamida	smiled	but	went	on	with	her	song,	matching	her	movements	to	the	rhythm	of	the
music.
‘Where	are	Khanzada	and	Gulbadan?’	Humayun	asked	when	the	song	was	ended.
‘Gulbadan	has	found	a	quiet	place	to	write	that	diary	she’s	started	keeping	but	Khanzada	is	sleeping.
The	heat	tires	her.’
‘But	it	doesn’t	tire	you?’
Hamida	shrugged.	‘I	must	keep	active	and	cheerful.	It	is	important	for	our	child	and	when	I	think	of
him	 nothing	 seems	 to	 matter	 except	 that	 he	 is	 born	 healthy.	 Gulbadan	 told	 me	 something	 amusing
today	–	that	the	mountain	clans	around	Kabul	have	a	way	of	predicting	the	sex	of	a	child.	They	take
two	scraps	of	paper	and	on	one	they	write	a	boy’s	name	and	on	the	other	a	girl’s.	Next	they	wrap	the
papers	in	thin	sheets	of	clay	which	they	plunge	into	a	basin	of	water.	Then	they	wait	to	see	which	sheet
of	clay	opens	first	.	.	.	I	have	no	need	of	such	tricks.	I	know	it’s	a	boy	.	.	.	’
She	 looked	 so	 happy,	 Humayun	 thought,	 despite	 everything.	 But	 he	 still	 felt	 guilty.	 If	 he	 hadn’t
chosen	her	–	insisted	on	her	–	as	his	wife	she	would	still	be	with	her	father.	Now,	instead	of	living	as
an	empress,	waited	on	by	hundreds	of	attendants,	dressing	in	gleaming	silks	and	dining	off	jewelled

plates	as	he	had	promised	her	father,	he	had	reduced	her	to	living	like	the	wife	of	a	poor	peasant.	And
far	worse	than	that	he	had	exposed	her	to	danger.	He	ran	a	finger	along	the	curve	of	Hamida’s	cheek.
‘As	soon	as	it	grows	cooler	this	evening,	I	will	go	hunting	with	Zahid	Beg.	We	might	find	some	ducks
amongst	the	reeds	that	would	make	good	eating.’
But	as	Humayun	walked	along	the	riverbank	to	the	camp	to	find	Zahid	Beg,	a	rider	came	galloping
into	the	settlement.	Humayun	recognised	Darya,	who	had	joined	Ahmed	Khan’s	scouts.	His	grey	horse
was	foamy	with	sweat	and	his	own	clothes	were	dark	with	it.	He	looked	only	a	little	less	anxious	and
exhausted	than	when	he	had	brought	the	news	of	Kabul’s	fall.
‘Majesty!’	Darya	slid	from	the	saddle.
‘What	is	it?’
‘A	column	of	Rajput	cavalry	about	fifteen	miles	from	here.’
‘How	many?’
‘At	least	three	hundred,	well	mounted	and	some	armed	with	muskets.	They	are	travelling	light	and
fast	–	we	saw	no	baggage	train.’
‘From	which	direction	are	they	coming?’
‘From	the	northwest.’
‘So	they	could	be	soldiers	from	Marwar	.	.	.	’	Why	had	he	assumed	Maldeo	had	given	up	the	hunt
when	the	prize	was	so	great?	‘Where	is	Ahmed	Khan?’
‘Still	trying	to	discover	whose	men	they	are	and	where	they	might	be	heading.	He	sent	me	to	warn
you	but	promised	he	would	not	be	far	behind.’
Ten	minutes	later,	Humayun	addressed	his	commanders.	Darya’s	news	had	ended	his	uncertainties.
He	knew	with	absolute	clarity	what	he	must	do.
‘Our	scouts	have	sighted	a	detachment	of	Rajput	cavalry	only	fifteen	miles	away.	Whether	fate	has
brought	them	this	close	to	us	or	whether	they	know	we	are	here,	I	don’t	know.	But	what	I	am	certain
of	is	that	we	cannot	fight	here.’	He	gestured	towards	the	mud-built	dwellings	outside	which	women	in
cotton	 saris	 with	 brass	 bangles	 gleaming	 on	 their	 wrists	 and	 ankles	 were	 squatting,	 trying	 to	 coax
fires	of	cattle	dung	into	life	so	they	could	start	cooking	the	evening	meal.
‘But	where	will	we	go,	Majesty?’	asked	Zahid	Beg.
‘Over	the	Luni.	The	ford	a	mile	upriver	from	here	is	easy	to	cross	–	no	more	than	a	couple	of	feet
deep.	I	was	there	yesterday.	Then	we	will	head	due	west	across	the	desert.	The	headman	has	told	me	of
a	remote	place	called	Umarkot	where	we	should	be	safe.’
Humayun	saw	his	commanders	exchange	glances.	They	too	had	heard	of	the	desert’s	dangers.	‘The
desert	has	an	evil	reputation,	I	know.	But	that	is	why	our	enemies	will	hesitate	to	follow	us,	even	if
they	discover	that	is	where	we	have	gone.	But	don’t	fear	–	we	will	take	a	guide	from	here	to	lead	us	.	.
.	He	will	make	sure	that	.	.	.	’
Distracted	 by	 the	 beat	 of	 fast-approaching	 hooves,	 Humayun	 looked	 round	 to	 see	 Ahmed	 Khan
career	into	the	camp	raising	plumes	of	dust	and	scattering	hens.
‘Majesty,	they	are	soldiers	of	the	Raja	of	Jaisalmer.	He	has	allied	himself	with	Maldeo.	I	learned
this	 from	 a	 herdsman	 who’d	 sold	 them	 some	 sheep.	 They	 boasted	 to	 him	 that	 they	 were	 hunting	 an
emperor,	that	the	scent	was	warm	and	that	soon	they’d	be	moving	in	for	the	kill.	But	their	conceit	is
greater	than	their	skill.	I	don’t	think	they’ve	yet	discovered	exactly	where	we	are	.	.	.	I	watched	them
ride	off	to	the	south	.	.	.	’
‘Even	so,	we	have	little	time.	Ahmed	Khan,	we	must	quickly	strike	camp,	cross	the	river	and	head
westward.	Summon	the	headman	and	ask	him	to	provide	us	with	a	guide	to	lead	us	through	the	desert
to	Umarkot.	Tell	him	I	will	reward	him	well	–	that	he	will	have	gold.’

As	 –	 watched	 by	 startled	 villagers	 –	 his	 men	 rushed	 to	 douse	 fires,	 collapse	 tents,	 collect	 their
weapons	and	fill	saddlebags,	Humayun	returned	to	Hamida.	She	had	put	her	spinning	aside.	Gulbadan
was	 with	 her	 now	 and	 they	 were	 laughing	 about	 something,	 but	 seeing	 Humayun’s	 expression	 both
fell	silent.
‘Ahmed	Khan	reports	Rajput	soldiers	not	far	from	here.’
Gulbadan	gasped	and	Hamida	instinctively	put	her	hand	on	her	stomach.	Humayun	took	her	face	in
his	hands,	feeling	the	warm	smoothness	of	her	skin.	Bending	his	head,	he	kissed	her	lips.	‘Courage.
No	one	will	harm	you,	I	promise.	Pack	up	what	you	can.	We	leave	within	the	hour.	Gulbadan	–	find
Khanzada	and	tell	her	what	has	happened.’

‘What’s	that?’	Humayun	stared	at	the	cloud	swirling	and	dancing	along	the	distant	horizon.	Surely	it
hadn’t	been	there	a	few	moments	ago.	The	sky	too	had	changed	–	no	longer	a	bright	almost	turquoise
blue	 but	 a	 lowering,	 steely	 grey.	 Humayun’s	 horse	 whinnied	 and	 tossed	 its	 head	 uneasily.	 Anil	 –
Simbu’s	 eighteen-year-old	 grandson	 who	 was	 acting	 as	 guide	 and	 was	 walking	 by	 the	 side	 of
Humayun’s	 horse	 –	 was	 also	 peering	 hard	 at	 the	 rolling	 billowing	 shape	 that	 even	 as	 they	 watched
seemed	to	grow	larger.
‘I	saw	it	only	once	before,	when	I	was	a	child.	Desert	travellers	call	it	“the	Demon	of	the	Sands”	.	.	.
it	is	terrible	.	.	.	It’s	a	great	sandstorm	with	whirlwinds	in	its	midst.’Anil	rubbed	a	hand	over	his	eyes
as	 if,	 by	 that	 gesture,	 he	 might	 make	 the	 terrible	 sight	 bearing	 down	 on	 them	 disappear.	 But	 as
Humayun	looked,	the	great	tawny	cloud	was	rushing	towards	them,	blotting	out	the	sun.	Suddenly	he
saw	 one	 of	 the	 whirlwinds	 at	 its	 centre.	 It	 looked	 as	 if	 it	 was	 sucking	 up	 the	 guts	 of	 the	 earth	 and
spewing	them	out.
‘Quickly	.	.	.	Tell	us	what	to	do.’	Humayun	leaned	down	and	shook	Anil’s	thin	shoulder.
‘We	must	make	hollows	for	ourselves	and	the	animals	in	the	sand	and	lie	in	them	with	our	backs	to
the	storm	until	it	has	passed	over.’
‘How	long	have	we	got?’
The	youth	stared	again	at	the	advancing	turmoil.	‘Only	a	few	minutes	.	.	.	’
‘Tell	 the	 men	 to	 dig	 themselves	 into	 the	 sand	 and	 pull	 their	 horses	 down	 behind	 them	 as	 extra
protection,’	yelled	Humayun	to	Jauhar	and	Zahid	Beg,	who	had	overheard	his	conversation	with	Anil.
Dismounting	and	leading	his	own	nervous,	skittering	horse	by	the	reins,	Humayun	stumbled	across	to
the	bullock	carts	containing	Hamida,	Gulbadan,	Khanzada	and	their	retainers.
‘Dig	 places	 in	 the	 sand	 for	 the	 women	 to	 shelter	 in	 –	 they	 must	 help	 you	 –	 and	 for	 yourselves,’
Humayun	 shouted	 to	 the	 bodyguards	 who’d	 been	 escorting	 them.	 ‘Quickly!	 Make	 your	 horses	 lie
down	by	you	but	unyoke	the	bullocks	–	they	must	fend	for	themselves.’
Even	before	he	had	finished	speaking,	Humayun	saw	that	despite	her	many	years	Khanzada	was	out
of	her	bullock	cart	and	bending	to	tear	at	the	ground	with	her	hands.	Gulbadan	was	close	beside	her.
‘Aunt,	 when	 the	 storm	 breaks	 over	 us,	 you	 and	 Gulbadan	 must	 lie	 down	 together,	 backs	 towards	 it,
and	hold	on	to	each	other,	do	you	understand?’
Without	 stopping	 her	 digging,	 Khanzada	 nodded	 but	 his	 half-sister	 looked	 ashen	 and	 he	 saw	 she
was	shaking.	‘Dig!’	Khanzada	shouted	at	her.

With	 figures	 frantically	 burrowing	 all	 around,	 Humayun	 hobbled	 his	 horse	 then	 lifted	 Hamida
from	the	bullock	cart	and	carried	her	a	few	yards	away	to	where	the	sand	looked	softer	and	easier	to
dig.
‘Let	me	help	.	.	.	’	Despite	her	bulk,	Hamida	knelt	beside	him	and	began	clawing	at	the	ground.They
worked	 frantically,	 hollowing	 out	 a	 place	 as	 best	 they	 could	 with	 bare	 hands.	 Hamida’s	 nails	 were
soon	bleeding.	Glancing	over	his	shoulder	Humayun	saw	the	storm	was	much	closer	now,	the	sand
and	 dirt	 within	 it	 darkening	 the	 sky.	 A	 roaring	 filled	 the	 air	 and	 though	 he	 could	 see	 Hamida	 was
saying	something	he	couldn’t	hear	her.	Frantically	he	redoubled	his	efforts	and,	as	the	wind	and	sand
overwhelmed	 them,	 grabbed	 Hamida	 and	 pulled	 her	 down	 into	 the	 space	 they’d	 dug.	 Her	 face	 was
against	his	chest	as	he	held	her	tightly	to	him,	arms	wrapped	around	her,	trying	to	shield	her	with	his
body.
Hamida	was	almost	torn	from	his	arms	but	he	clung	tightly	on	to	her,	his	face	feeling	as	if	it	was
being	 skinned	 and	 his	 hair	 as	 if	 it	 was	 being	 ripped	 from	 his	 scalp.	 Sand	 clogged	 his	 nostrils	 and
mouth	and	as	he	struggled	for	breath	his	burning	lungs	felt	ready	to	burst.	He	was	choking	and	as	he
fought	for	life	felt	his	grip	on	Hamida	slacken.
With	an	enormous	effort	he	willed	himself	to	keep	hold	of	her.	What	mattered	above	all	was	that
she	and	their	child	should	survive.	He	understood	now	how	his	father	must	have	felt	when,	believing
Humayun	was	dying,	he	had	run	into	the	mosque	of	the	Agra	fort	to	offer	God	his	life	for	his	son’s.
Let	her	live,	he	prayed,	and	let	our	child	live.	Take	my	life	for	theirs	if	that	is	your	will	.	.	.
As	he	continued	to	pray	he	realised	that	the	dust	and	tumult	were	receding.	He	felt	his	tortured	lungs
expand	as,	at	last,	he	managed	to	take	in	air.	Every	gasp	hurt	–	lips,	mouth,	throat,	windpipe	felt	raw
and	his	nostrils	were	still	full	of	sand.	As	for	his	eyes,	sand	had	got	under	the	lids	and	he	felt	as	if	redhot	needles	had	pricked	his	eyeballs.	He	tried	to	force	them	open	and	through	streaming	tears	to	look
down	at	Hamida	but	everything	seemed	blurred	and	he	closed	them	again.
He	could	feel	her	lying	very	still	in	his	arms.	Gently	releasing	her,	he	pulled	himself	up	into	a	halfsitting	position.	‘My	love	.	.	.	’	he	tried	to	say	but	no	words	came.	‘Hamida,’	he	managed	at	last	and
reaching	forward	tried	to	pull	her	up	too.	Finding	her	shoulders,	he	ran	his	hands	up	her	neck	to	take
her	face	between	his	palms.	She	felt	so	limp.	It	was	like	holding	a	dead	bird	in	his	hands	.	.	.
Stifled	groans	were	rising	from	all	around	but	Humayun	had	no	thought	for	anyone	but	Hamida.
Gently	he	pulled	her	face	against	his	chest	once	more	and	began	to	stroke	the	hair	that	was	once	so
silken	and	soft	but	was	now	gritty	and	tangled.	He	began	rocking	gently	back	and	forward,	as	if	he
were	holding	a	child.	The	motion	comforted	him,	delaying	the	moment	when	he	must	face	the	pain	of
losing	the	person	he	loved	above	all	others.
But	after	what	seemed	an	age	but	could	only	have	been	a	few	moments,	he	felt	Hamida	move.	Then
she	started	to	cough,	spitting	out	a	dirty	orange-coloured	mixture	of	saliva	and	sand.	Joy	that	she	was
alive	surged	through	Humayun.	Helping	her	to	sit	up,	he	heard	her	taking	in	great,	greedy	gulps	of
air,	just	as	he	had	done.
‘It’s	all	right,’	he	said	gruffly,	‘everything’s	all	right	.	.	.	’
After	a	moment	he	felt	Hamida	take	his	hand	and	place	it	on	her	domed	belly.	As	he	felt	the	child
within	kicking	strongly,	fresh	tears	ran	down	his	sand-covered	face	but	this	time	they	were	of	joy	not
pain.
Slowly,	people	and	animals	were	hauling	themselves	to	their	feet,	though	some	lay	ominously	still.
Standing	up,	Humayun	saw	the	feebly	twitching	body	of	a	horse	lying	nearby	beneath	a	thick	layer	of
sand.	Staggering	over,	he	knelt	beside	it	and	brushing	the	sand	from	its	face	recognised	his	stallion.	In
the	 last	 terrifying	 moments	 before	 the	 whirlwind	 ripped	 over	 them	 he’d	 forgotten	 the	 animal

completely.	It	must	have	tried	to	gallop	off	but	hobbled	had	crashed	to	the	ground.	Running	his	hands
over	its	fetlocks,	Humayun	felt	the	fracture	in	the	bone.	Whispering	softly	into	its	ear	and	stroking	its
neck	with	one	hand,	with	the	other	he	drew	his	dagger	and	swiftly	severed	the	jugular,	warm	blood
spurting	over	him	and	staining	the	sandy	ground.
Looking	round	he	saw	that	Zainab	had	brought	Hamida	some	water	to	drink.	But	another	female
figure	 was	 stumbling	 towards	 him	 –	 Gulbadan,	 hair	 wild,	 clothes	 crusted	 with	 sand	 and	 glistening
tracks	on	her	filthy	face	from	the	tears	she	was	crying.	He	tried	to	take	her	in	his	arms	to	comfort	her
but	she	pulled	away	from	him.
‘It’s	Khanzada	.	.	.	’	Gulbadan	led	him	over	to	where	a	body	was	lying	and	Humayun	looked	down
on	his	aunt’s	sand-streaked	face.	Her	eyes	were	closed	and	from	the	angle	of	her	head,	he	–	who	had
seen	so	many	dead	bodies	on	the	battlefield	–	knew	she	was	dead.	Mechanically,	he	put	a	hand	against
her	neck	but	there	was	no	pulse.	She	must	have	suffocated	–	her	nostrils	and	mouth	looked	choked
with	sand	and	her	hands	were	clenched	as	if	she’d	engaged	in	a	mighty	struggle	with	death,	fighting
until	the	last.
‘She	behaved	like	the	mother	she	had	become	to	me	since	the	death	of	my	own.	She	shielded	me
with	her	body.	She	knew	how	afraid	I	was	.	.	.	’	Gulbadan	whispered.
Humayun	 was	 silent,	 unable	 to	 conjure	 any	 words	 even	 to	 comfort	 Gulbadan.	 Khanzada	 –	 the
woman	 who	 had	 shared	 Babur ’s	 tragedies	 and	 triumphs	 and	 guided	 his	 own	 first	 steps	 as	 emperor,
forcing	him	to	fight	opium	and	face	his	destiny	–	was	gone.	That	she	should	die	like	this,	snuffed	out
in	a	sandstorm,	after	all	that	she	had	seen	and	endured	in	her	lifetime	seemed	cruel	and	terrible.	Never
would	he	forget	her	courage	or	her	selfless	love	for	him	and	unflinching	devotion	to	their	dynasty.	A
deep	sadness	crept	over	him,	extinguishing	the	joy	of	a	few	moments	ago.	Khanzada’s	final	resting
place	should	have	been	a	flower-filled	garden	on	the	banks	of	the	Jumna	in	Agra,	or	on	the	hillside
above	 Kabul	 next	 to	 her	 brother	 Babur.	 But	 that	 couldn’t	 be.	 He	 bent	 and	 lifted	 his	 aunt’s	 body	 and
cradling	her	tenderly	in	his	arms	spoke.	‘Though	this	is	a	wild	and	desolate	place,	we	must	bury	her
here.	I	myself	will	dig	her	grave.’

At	 last,	 ten	 long	 hot	 days	 later,	 the	 walls	 of	 Umarkot	 appeared	 on	 the	 horizon	 before	 Humayun’s
exhausted	column.	He	saw	Kasim	and	Zahid	Beg	exchange	glances	of	relief.	Ten	of	Humayun’s	men
had	been	killed	in	the	storm	–	two	struck	by	pieces	of	flying	timber	from	bullock	carts	that	had	been
smashed	 by	 one	 of	 the	 whirlwinds.	 Many,	 like	 Jauhar,	 had	 been	 badly	 grazed	 and	 cut,	 some	 had
broken	bones	and	one	of	his	best	musketeers	had	lost	the	sight	of	an	eye	to	a	piece	of	sharp	stone.
So	many	horses	had	been	killed	or	scattered	that	most	of	the	men	were	on	foot,	Humayun	amongst
them.	Much	of	their	equipment	including	many	muskets	had	also	been	destroyed	or	buried.	Even	if	it
hadn’t,	without	carts	and	with	only	a	few	pack	animals	left	–	ten	mules	and	six	camels	–	they	would
have	had	to	abandon	most	of	it	anyway.	As	it	was,	they’d	loaded	what	they	could	on	to	the	few	beasts
they	had.	Humayun’s	one	remaining	treasure	chest	had	survived	intact	but	had	now	been	emptied	and
the	contents	transferred	into	saddlebags.	The	Koh-i-Nur	was	still	safely	in	its	pouch	around	his	neck.
Humayun	 was	 trudging	 by	 the	 side	 of	 a	 moth-eaten	 camel	 that	 spat	 balls	 of	 malodorous	 phlegm
into	 the	 sand	 and	 groaned	 as	 it	 made	 its	 splay-footed	 way.	 Hardly	 a	 suitable	 conveyance	 for	 his
empress,	 Humayun	 thought,	 glancing	 up	 at	 Hamida	 who	 was	 riding	 in	 a	 pannier	 suspended	 against

one	of	the	camel’s	bony	sides,	balanced	by	Gulbadan	in	another	pannier	on	the	other	side.	Hamida’s
eyes	 were	 closed	 and	 she	 seemed	 to	 be	 dozing.	 With	 luck	 they	 should	 reach	 Umarkot	 by	 nightfall,
Humayun	thought,	then	he	could	find	Hamida	somewhere	better	to	rest.
But	Umarkot	must	have	been	farther	away	than	he’d	reckoned.	Distance	could	be	deceptive	in	the
desert.	When	the	western	skies	turned	blood-red	as	the	disc	of	the	sun	slipped	below	the	horizon,	the
low	outline	of	the	oasis	still	looked	to	be	several	miles	off.	With	night	falling,	it	might	be	unwise	to
go	on.	Humayun	shouted	the	command	for	the	column	to	halt	and	was	looking	around	for	Anil	to	ask
his	advice	when	suddenly	he	heard	Hamida	give	a	sharp	cry,	then	another.
‘What	is	it?’
‘The	baby	.	.	.	I	think	it’s	coming.’
Tapping	the	camel	on	its	legs	so	that	it	collapsed	grunting	on	to	its	knees,	Humayun	lifted	Hamida
out	of	the	pannier	and	carried	her	over	to	a	clump	of	low,	spiny-leaved	bushes	where	he	gently	laid
her	down.	By	now	Gulbadan	had	climbed	out	of	her	pannier	and	was	squatting	down	on	the	other	side
of	Hamida,	stroking	her	hot	face	and	smoothing	back	her	hair.
‘Stay	with	her,	Gulbadan.	I	will	send	Zainab	and	the	other	women	to	you.	I	must	try	to	get	help	from
Umarkot.’
As	he	ran	towards	where	his	men	had	halted,	Humayun’s	heart	was	pounding.	Never	had	he	known
fear	quite	like	this	–	not	even	during	the	worst,	most	bloody	battle.	The	baby	should	not	be	coming
now.	 Hamida	 had	 been	 certain	 there	 was	 at	 least	 another	 month	 to	 go	 .	 .	 .	 what	 if	 something	 went
wrong,	if	she	should	die	out	here	in	this	hostile	wilderness	which	had	already	claimed	Khanzada?
‘Jauhar,’	he	shouted	as	soon	as	he	was	within	earshot.	‘The	empress	is	in	labour.	Take	the	best	of
the	horses	we	have	left	and	ride	for	Umarkot	as	hard	as	you	can.	Tell	the	people	there	who	I	am	and
that	 I	 ask	 for	 shelter	 for	 my	 wife.	 Under	 the	 customs	 of	 hospitality	 they	 cannot	 refuse.	 Even	 if	 the
people	 fear	 me	 and	 my	 soldiers	 they	 will	 surely	 help	 Hamida	 –	 there	 will	 be	 hakims	 and	 midwives
there.	Hurry!’
Jauhar	 rode	 off	 into	 the	 gathering	 gloom	 on	 a	 small	 roan	 mare	 which	 still	 had	 a	 little	 life	 in	 its
wasted	legs.	Hurrying	back	to	Hamida,	Humayun	found	her	surrounded	by	a	small	huddle	of	women
who	parted	as	he	approached.	She	was	lying	on	her	back,	eyes	closed	and	breathing	heavily.	Her	face
was	slippery	with	sweat.
‘Her	 waters	 have	 broken,	 Majesty,’	 said	 Zainab.	 ‘I	 know	 –	 I	 watched	 my	 sisters	 give	 birth	 many
times.	And	her	pains	are	becoming	more	frequent	.	.	.	it	won’t	be	long	.	.	.	’	As	if	to	bear	out	Zainab’s
words,	Hamida	moaned	and	tears	welled	from	beneath	her	eyelids,	mingling	with	the	sweat	that	was
pouring	off	her	now.	As	another	spasm	racked	her,	she	arched	her	back	then	drew	her	knees	up	and
rolled	over	on	to	her	side.
Humayun	could	hardly	bear	to	watch.	As	the	hours	passed	and	Hamida’s	groans	grew	louder	and
more	frequent,	he	paced	helplessly	about,	returning	to	Hamida’s	side	every	few	minutes	or	so	only	to
go	 off	 again.	 The	 sounds	 of	 the	 night	 –	 the	 occasional	 rasping	 shriek	 of	 a	 peacock,	 the	 bark	 of	 a
jackal	 –	 increased	 his	 sense	 of	 powerlessness.	 Where	 was	 Jauhar?	 Perhaps	 he	 should	 have	 gone
himself	–	or	sent	Timur ’s	ring	with	Jauhar	as	proof	of	who	he	was	.	.	.
Another	 half-smothered	 cry	 from	 Hamida	 made	 him	 wince	 as	 if	 he	 was	 feeling	 the	 pain	 as	 well.
That	she	should	be	giving	birth	in	this	desperate,	desolate	place	beneath	a	bush	.	.	.
‘Majesty.’	 Humayun	 had	 been	 so	 lost	 in	 his	 private	 agony	 that	 he	 had	 not	 seen	 or	 heard	 Jauhar
approaching	out	of	the	darkness	at	the	head	of	a	small	group	of	riders	who	were	leading	some	spare
horses,	between	two	of	which	was	suspended	a	litter.
‘Majesty,’	 Jauhar	 said	 again.‘The	 ruler	 of	 Umarkot	 welcomes	 you.	 He	 has	 sent	 a	 hakim	 and	 a

midwife	and	soldiers	to	bring	you,	the	empress	and	your	personal	entourage	to	his	dwelling.’
Humayun	bowed	his	head	in	relief.
Pale	 moonlight	 silvered	 the	 crude	 mud	 walls	 of	 Umarkot	 as	 Humayun	 and	 his	 small	 party,
including	 half	 a	 dozen	 of	 his	 bodyguards,	 rode	 in,	 leaving	 the	 rest	 of	 the	 column	 to	 make	 its	 way
under	 Zahid	 Beg.	 The	 midwife	 had	 already	 given	 Hamida	 a	 potion	 of	 herbs	 which	 seemed	 to	 have
eased	her	pains.
In	the	torchlight	it	was	hard	for	Humayun	to	take	in	his	surroundings	and	his	eyes	were	anyway	on
Hamida	as	the	soldiers	gently	detached	her	litter	from	the	horses	and	bore	it	through	the	doorway	of	a
large	building	lit	on	either	side	by	torches	burning	in	sconces.	He	followed	the	litter	down	a	corridor
at	the	end	of	which	he	saw	a	pair	of	carved	wooden	doors	with	attendants	stationed	by	them.	As	the
party	drew	near,	the	attendants	swung	the	doors	open.	Hamida,	with	the	hakim	and	the	midwife	close
behind,	 was	 carried	 in.	 Humayun	 was	 about	 to	 follow	 when	 a	 man	 he	 hadn’t	 noticed	 in	 long	 dark
green	robes	stepped	forward	and	bowed.
‘Majesty,	I	am	the	Rana	of	Umarkot’s	vizier,	whom	he	has	sent	to	welcome	you.	This	is	the	way	to
the	women’s	apartments.The	only	man	apart	from	the	rana	who	is	allowed	to	enter	is	the	hakim.	 But
you	will	have	apartments	close	by	and	news	will	be	brought	to	you	at	once.’
What	could	he	could	do	but	agree,	Humayun	thought,	and	nodded.	The	hours	passed	very	slowly
that	 night,	 or	 so	 it	 seemed	 to	 him.	 Just	 as	 dawn	 was	 breaking	 –	 he	 had	 been	 watching	 the	 slow
lightening	to	the	east	through	the	casement	–	he	must	have	drifted	into	a	light	sleep.	Feeling	a	hand	on
his	shoulder,	he	immediately	leaped	up,	feeling	instinctively	for	his	dagger,	then	saw	that	it	was	full
daylight	and	that	it	was	Gulbadan	who	had	roused	him.	She	was	smiling	in	a	way	he	had	not	seen	for
many	days.
‘Humayun,	 you	 have	 a	 son,	 lusty	 and	 sturdy	 and	 already	 bawling	 his	 head	 off.	 The	 midwife	 will
bring	him	to	you	in	a	few	minutes,	as	soon	as	she	has	cleaned	him.’
‘And	Hamida?’
‘The	 labour	 was	 very	 hard	 for	 her.	 She	 needed	 all	 the	 midwife’s	 skill.	 But	 she	 is	 well	 and	 is
sleeping	now.’
For	a	moment	Humayun	bowed	his	head,	as	joy	and	relief	flooded	through	him	in	equal	measure.
Then	from	his	pocket	he	drew	a	pod	of	precious	musk	that	he	had	been	saving	for	this	moment	and
handed	it	to	Gulbadan.	‘Take	it	to	the	birth	chamber.	Break	it	open	in	celebration	and	let	the	fragrance
fill	the	room	–	let	it	be	one	of	the	first	things	my	son	smells	on	this	earth.	Tell	Hamida	that	though	it
is	 all	 I	 can	 give	 her	 just	 now	 it	 carries	 not	 only	 my	 love	 but	 the	 scent	 of	 our	 family’s	 greatness	 to
come.’

Chapter	14
Akbar
‘I	 name	 you	 Akbar	 –	 it	 means	 “great”	 and	 great	 you	 will	 Ibe.’	 As	 he	 spoke	 Humayun	 picked	 up	 a
cream-coloured	 jade	 dish	 –	 a	 gift	 from	 the	 Rana	 of	 Umarkot	 –	 and	 gently	 showered	 Akbar ’s	 head
with	the	contents,	shahrukhys	–	tiny	golden	coins	–	to	symbolise	his	future	prosperity.	Akbar,	lying
naked	 on	 a	 velvet	 cushion	 in	 Kasim’s	 arms,	 flailed	 his	 arms	 and	 legs	 in	 surprise	 but	 did	 not	 cry.
Taking	him	gently	from	the	cushion,	Humayun	lifted	him	high	so	that	all	his	assembled	commanders
could	see	him	and	cried	out,	‘I	present	to	you	my	son,	seventh	in	descent	from	the	great	Timur.	Be	as
loyal	to	him	as	you	have	been	to	me.’	Clashing	their	swords	on	their	shields,	Humayun’s	men	roared
the	 traditional	 greeting	 to	 a	 new	 prince	 of	 the	 blood	 of	 Timur,	 ‘Mirza	 Akbar!	 Mirza	 Akbar!’	 until
Humayun	raised	his	arms	for	calm.
Now	it	was	time	for	Hamida’s	part	in	the	ceremony.	Propped	on	a	divan	she	still	looked	exhausted
–	 skin	 pale	 as	 ivory	 and	 deep	 shadows	 under	 her	 dark,	 luminous	 eyes.	 Though	 Humayun	 had
suggested	waiting	until	she	felt	stronger,	she	had	said	no.	‘Your	men	have	been	through	so	much	for
you.	You	owe	it	to	them	to	show	them	your	heir	as	soon	as	possible.	It	will	bind	them	to	you	even
more	 strongly.’	 Carrying	 the	 squirming	 Akbar	 over	 to	 her,	 Humayun	 placed	 him	 in	 her	 arms.
Simulating	putting	the	child	to	her	breast,	she	recited	the	words	that	had	come	down	to	the	Moghuls
from	before	even	Timur,	from	the	days	of	the	Oceanic	Ruler	himself,	Genghis	Khan:	‘Drink,	my	son.
Put	your	honeyed	lips	to	my	benign	breasts	and	sweeten	your	mouth	with	the	life-giving	fluid.’
Discovering	that	he	was	not,	after	all,	about	to	be	fed,	Akbar	began	to	yell.As	Hamida	tried	to	quiet
him,	 Humayun	 addressed	 his	 men	 once	 more.	 ‘With	 my	 astrologer	 Sharaf,	 I	 have	 cast	 my	 son’s
horoscope.	 The	 date	 of	 his	 birth	 –	 15	 October	 1542,	 with	 the	 moon	 in	 Leo	 –	 could	 not	 be	 more
auspicious.	A	child	so	born	will	be	fortunate	and	long-lived.	We	have	suffered	hardship	and	reverses.
There	are	perhaps	more	dark	times	to	come	before	we	can	reclaim	what	is	ours	but	a	glorious	future
beckons	to	Akbar	and	to	us.	Tonight	we	will	feast	and	celebrate	the	victories	to	come.’	Again	his	men
clashed	their	weapons.	This	time	their	chant	was	‘Mirza	Humayun’	but	he	turned	away,	heart	too	full
for	any	more	words.
Later,	when	they	were	alone	again,	Humayun	watched	Hamida	pull	down	the	neck	of	her	robe	and
give	Akbar	her	breast,	looking	tenderly	down	on	his	head	with	its	soft	fuzz	of	black	hair	as	he	sucked
vigorously.	 The	 knowledge	 that	 he	 had	 a	 son	 filled	 him	 with	 unspeakable	 pride.	 In	 the	 days	 before
Hamida,	none	of	his	concubines	had,	as	far	as	he	knew,	borne	him	a	child.	Now,	at	thirty-four	years
old,	he	realised	how	much	a	son	would	satisfy	his	craving	for	some	deeper	purpose	to	his	life.
‘Hamida	 .	 .	 .	 ’	 He	 paused,	 searching	 for	 words	 to	 express	 his	 feelings.	 ‘For	 the	 first	 time	 I	 feel	 I
truly	understand	the	depth	of	a	father ’s	love	.	.	.	how	far	it	exceeds	even	that	of	a	child	for	its	parent.	I
have	tried	to	be	true	to	my	own	father ’s	love	and	trust	in	bestowing	my	inheritance	on	me	but	now,	as
a	father	myself,	I	promise	you	I	will	recapture	and	enlarge	my	empire	so	that	I	leave	a	worthy	legacy
to	our	son.’
Hamida	nodded	but	said	nothing.	But	there	was	something	he	had	to	talk	to	her	about	–	something

important	 for	 Akbar ’s	 future.	 He	 must	 tell	 her	 that	 soon	 another	 woman	 would	 feed	 her	 son.	 They
must	 appoint	 a	 wet-nurse.	 It	 was	 the	 most	 important	 position	 that	 could	 be	 given	 to	 a	 woman	 at	 the
Moghul	court.	She	became	his	‘milk-mother ’,	establishing	a	bond	that	would	endure	her	whole	life
through.	Any	son	of	her	own	automatically	became	the	prince’s	kukaldash,	his	‘milk-brother ’,	bound
to	protect	him	and	in	turn	to	receive	favour.	Her	husband,	too,	enjoyed	great	status.	Senior	courtiers
and	commanders	coveted	the	position	for	their	wives	as	keenly	as	any	political	or	military	rank	for
themselves.	If	handled	badly,	the	choice	would	provoke	jealousy	and	envy.
‘Hamida,	there	is	something	we	must	decide.	In	these	difficult	times,	I	have	few	ways	to	reward	my
commanders	but	I	do	have	one	thing	to	give.	As	is	the	Timurid	way,	we	must	choose	a	wet-nurse	for
Akbar,	a	woman	who	is	worthy	and	whom	we	can	trust	but	also	a	woman	whose	husband	deserves	my
favour	and	will	consider	himself	honoured	by	our	choice.’
Hamida	raised	her	head	and	looked	at	him.	She	had	not	been	brought	up	as	a	member	of	the	royal
house,	of	course.	She	could	not	know	all	the	old	royal	customs.	Though	noblewomen	often	employed
nurses	to	suckle	their	children,	they	were	only	servants	who	could	easily	be	dispensed	with	and	had
no	lasting	role	in	the	child’s	life.	He	was	asking	something	very	different	of	Hamida	–	to	share	her
child	with	another	woman.
For	a	while	she	was	silent,	then	she	spoke.	‘Don’t	look	so	anxious.	I’ve	known	about	the	custom	for
a	 long	 time	 –	 Khanzada	 told	 me.	 I	 think	 she	 wanted	 to	 help	 prepare	 me,	 not	 just	 for	 becoming	 a
mother	but	for	being	the	mother	of	a	future	emperor.	At	first	I	was	upset.	But	since	Khanzada’s	death,
I’ve	reflected	on	her	words	–	that	by	choosing	the	right	wet-nurse	I	would	not	be	giving	up	my	child
but	 helping	 to	 protect	 him.	 Though	 it	 still	 makes	 me	 sad,	 I	 can	 see	 that	 she	 was	 right	 .	 .	 .	 Let	 us	 be
practical.	Whom	should	we	choose?	There	are	so	few	women	with	us	now,	even	fewer	with	babies.’
‘Zahid	Beg’s	wife	is	too	old	to	have	milk	in	her	breasts	or	I	would	have	chosen	her	in	recognition
of	his	loyalty	and	bravery.	But	there	is	another	commander	I	would	like	to	reward	–	Nadim	Khwaja,	a
chieftain	from	near	Kandahar	whose	wife	is	with	him.	Shortly	after	we	fled	from	Marwar	she	bore
him	a	son.’
‘I	 know	 her,	 of	 course.	 A	 tall,	 handsome	 woman	 called	 Maham	 Anga.	 Her	 son’s	 name	 is	 Adham
Khan.’
‘You	would	accept	Maham	Anga?	If	there	is	another	you	would	prefer	.	.	.	’
‘I	 am	 content.	 Maham	 Anga	 is	 strong	 and	 healthy,	 as	 well	 as	 honest	 and	 full	 of	 good	 common
sense.	Her	son	is	a	sturdy	vigorous	baby.	She	is	the	one	I	would	have	chosen.’	Gently	detaching	Akbar
from	 one	 breast,	 Hamida	 moved	 him	 across	 to	 the	 other.	 How	 beautiful	 she	 looked,	 Humayun
thought,	despite	all	the	recent	hardships	and	the	ordeal	of	childbirth.	And	though	still	so	young,	nearly
twenty	 years	 his	 junior,	 how	 strong.	 It	 must	 be	 hard	 for	 her	 to	 think	 of	 Akbar	 in	 another	 woman’s
arms	yet	she	hid	her	pain	as	courageously	as	a	warrior	concealed	his	fear.	He	had	chosen	her	out	of
love	but	even	here	in	this	remote,	mud-walled	oasis,	far	from	home	and	safety,	she	had	the	bearing	of
an	empress.	Approaching	the	divan,	he	bent	and	kissed	Hamida’s	lips	and	then	the	downy	crown	of	his
son’s	head.
‘What	came	of	your	meeting	with	the	rana?	Do	you	believe	we	are	safe	here?’	Hamida	asked.
‘I	think	so.	Though	the	rana	is	himself	a	Rajput,	there	seems	no	love	lost	between	him	and	Maldeo.
Last	year,	Maldeo’s	men	raided	caravans	from	Umarkot	as	they	crossed	the	Rajasthani	desert.	As	the
merchants	were	formally	under	the	rana’s	protection	he	took	it	as	a	great	insult.	Of	course,	Maldeo	is
far	too	powerful	for	the	rana	to	think	of	revenge,	but	he	has	no	wish	for	any	dealings	with	him.	He
will	not	betray	us	to	Maldeo,	I	am	certain	of	it,	though	we	cannot	linger	here	too	long.	Inaccessible
though	Umarkot	is,	we	will	eventually	be	pursued	here.	As	soon	as	we	can	–	as	soon	as	you	are	strong

enough	–	we	will	leave.’
‘But	where	to?’
‘The	only	direction	it	makes	sense	to	go	is	northwest	to	Kabul.	Until	I	have	retaken	it	and	punished
Kamran	and	Askari	for	their	treachery	I	have	no	chance	of	dislodging	Sher	Shah	from	Hindustan	.	.	.	’
Humayun	hesitated.	‘It	will	be	a	hard,	dangerous	journey.	Should	I	find	some	safe	place	to	leave	you
and	Akbar	until	it	is	safe	for	you	to	join	me	.	.	.	?’
‘No.	 You	 already	 know	 I	 can	 endure	 harsh	 conditions	 as	 long	 as	 we	 are	 together.	 I	 told	 you	 I’d
learned	much	from	Khanzada.	She	would	never	have	agreed	to	be	left	behind	and	neither	will	I	.	.	.	’

The	walls	of	dusty	Umarkot	faded	into	the	pale	apricot	haze	as	Humayun	led	his	men	once	more	out
into	the	desert	a	week	later.	Their	destination	was	the	fortress	of	Bhakkar,	an	outpost	belonging	to	his
cousin	Mirza	Husain,	the	ruler	of	Sind,	two	hundred	miles	away	on	the	northern	borders	of	Sind	on
the	banks	of	the	Indus.	Since	the	two	of	them	had	parted	on	ostensibly	cordial	terms	Humayun	hoped
to	 find	 temporary	 shelter	 there.	 And	 at	 Bhakkar,	 remote	 though	 it	 was,	 he	 might	 also	 finally	 learn
what	had	been	happening	in	the	outside	world.
Knowing	 that	 each	 mile	 was	 taking	 them	 further	 from	 the	 risk	 of	 being	 overtaken,	 Humayun
pushed	the	pace.	Every	morning	the	column	set	out	as	the	first	rays	of	the	sun	seeped	over	the	horizon
and,	apart	from	a	brief	break	at	midday	to	rest	the	animals	and	to	eat	a	simple	meal	of	bread,	dried
meat	 and	 a	 few	 raisins,	 did	 not	 halt	 until	 dusk.	 Within	 just	 two	 weeks,	 they	 were	 entering	 a	 land	 of
villages	and	fields	so	startlingly	fresh	and	green	after	their	long	desert	journey	that	it	was	obvious	the
Indus	 could	 not	 be	 far.	 Soon	 Bhakkar ’s	 sturdy	 sandstone	 walls	 rose	 before	 them	 while	 westward,
across	the	Indus,	Humayun	saw	distant	purple	shadows	–	the	mountains	of	Baluchistan.	They	were	so
like	the	mountains	of	Kabul,	he	felt	his	heart	contract.
‘Jauhar,	 ride	 to	 Bhakkar.Ask	 entry	 in	 the	 name	 of	 Humayun,	 Moghul	 Emperor	 of	 Hindustan	 and
blood-kin	of	Mirza	Husain	of	Sind.’
An	hour	later	Humayun	led	his	column	into	the	fortress	where	the	officer	in	command	was	waiting
to	 receive	 him.	 ‘Greetings,	 Majesty,	 on	 behalf	 of	 my	 master	 you	 are	 welcome.	 My	 name	 is	 Sayyid
Ali.’	As	the	commander	touched	his	hand	to	his	breast,	Humayun	saw	that	he	was	quite	elderly	with
thin	grey	hair	and	a	white	scar	on	his	left	temple.
That	 night,	 Humayun	 sat	 with	 Kasim	 and	 Zahid	 Beg	 by	 Sayyid	 Ali’s	 side	 around	 a	 brazier	 of
smouldering	applewood	whose	warmth	was	just	enough	to	take	the	chill	off	the	air	rising	from	the
river.	 ‘I	 have	 had	 little	 news	 since	 a	 messenger	 brought	 word	 that	 Kabul	 had	 fallen	 to	 my	 halfbrothers,	Kamran	and	Askari.	Can	you	tell	me	any	more?’
Sayyid	Ali	cast	him	what	seemed	a	slightly	puzzled	look.	‘Indeed,	Majesty,	there	is	much	more	that
you	should	know,	even	if	the	knowledge	will	displease	you.	Travellers	from	Kandahar	who	passed	by
on	their	way	downriver	told	us	that	your	half-brother	Hindal	had	seized	their	city.’
Humayun	 stood	 up	 so	 abruptly	 that	 the	 wooden	 stool	 he’d	 been	 sitting	 on	 tipped	 over,	 falling
against	the	brazier.	‘How	did	it	happen?’
‘I	 heard	 that	 it	 fell	 to	 him	 without	 a	 struggle.	 The	 governor	 believed	 he	 was	 still	 your	 ally	 and
admitted	him	and	his	forces.’
So	that	was	what	Hindal	had	been	doing.	Not	heading	for	Kabul	and	an	alliance	with	Kamran	and

Askari	 as	 Humayun	 had	 suspected	 but	 veering	 westward	 to	 set	 up	 his	 own	 kingdom	 in	 Kandahar.
Humayun	stared	into	the	glowing	embers	of	the	fire	as	he	remembered	the	last	time	he’d	seen	Hindal,
blood-spattered	and	spitting	defiance	because	Humayun	wanted	Hamida	and	would	not	be	denied.
‘So	Hindal	rules	in	Kandahar	.	.	.	’	he	said	at	last.
‘No,	Majesty.’
‘But	you	said	.	.	.	’
‘Something	 else	 happened,	 Majesty.	 Learning	 that	 Hindal	 was	 in	 Kandahar,	 your	 half-brother
Kamran	ordered	him	to	acknowledge	him	as	his	overlord	and	to	hold	Kandahar	only	as	his	governor.
When	he	refused,	Kamran	and	Askari	rode	there	with	a	large	army,	captured	the	city	and	took	Hindal
prisoner.	No	one	knows	what	happened	to	him	.	.	.	’
Humayun’s	heart	was	beating	very	fast.	Kamran	and	Askari	were	so	much	nearer	than	he’d	believed
.	 .	 .	 Kandahar	 was	 no	 more	 than	 three	 hundred	 miles	 away,	 far	 closer	 than	 Kabul.	 Perhaps	 fate	 had
guided	 him	 to	 Bhakkar.	 Though	 he	 had	 so	 few	 men	 –	 barely	 two	 hundred	 –	 they	 were	 from	 the
Moghul	clans,	his	most	trusted	warriors	–	his	ichkis.	And	more	would	join	him	if	they	thought	there
might	 be	 booty.The	 mountain	 tribesmen	 of	 Baluchistan	 had	 a	 well-deserved	 reputation	 for	 selling
their	swords	for	gold.	If	he	was	quick	he	could	move	on	Kandahar,	take	it	and	capture	his	brothers
before	they	had	any	warning.Yet	there	was	something	else	he	must	know	before	he	could	contemplate
such	a	move.
‘What	of	Sher	Shah,	Sayyid	Ali?	Where	is	he?’
‘In	Bengal,	where	there	has	been	a	revolt	against	him.	But	more	than	that	I	do	not	know	.	.	.	except
that	they	say	his	rule	over	Hindustan	is	like	iron	–	hard	and	unbending.’
Excellent,	thought	Humayun.	With	Sher	Shah	far	away	and	preoccupied,	he	need	fear	no	pursuit	by
him.
‘I	am	grateful	to	you,	Sayyid	Ali,	for	your	hospitality	but	even	more	for	what	you	have	told	me.	I
wish	to	take	my	people	across	the	Indus	as	soon	as	possible	.	.	.	The	currents	are	swift	and	treacherous
but	you	will	know	the	safest	place	for	us	to	cross	.	.	.	’

Humayun	 shivered	 as	 the	 cold	 wind	 seemed	 to	 renew	 its	 strength	 and	 snowflakes	 fluttered	 around
him.	 His	 head	 felt	 frozen	 solid	 and	 he	 pulled	 his	 long	 sheepskin	 jacket	 more	 tightly	 around	 him.
Ahead	 rode	 the	 two	 Baluchi	 tribesmen	 Ahmed	 Khan	 had	 hired	 to	 guide	 them,	 who	 had	 just	 assured
him	that	the	party	had	covered	nearly	half	the	journey	and	were	now	ascending	the	snowy	Bolan	Pass,
only	 a	 hundred	 and	 thirty	 or	 so	 miles	 from	 Kandahar.	 The	 guides	 seemed	 to	 expect	 praise	 but	 to
Humayun	progress	had	grown	painfully	slow	the	thicker	the	ice	and	snow	had	become.	But	at	least	his
goal	–	the	city	Babur	himself	had	captured	for	the	Moghuls	twenty	years	before	–	would	soon	be	in
sight.
Hamida	and	Gulbadan,	wearing	fur-lined	cloaks	with	voluminous	hoods	over	their	thick	woollen
robes,	 were	 close	 behind	 him	 on	 ponies.	 The	 oxen	 had	 been	 unable	 to	 struggle	 up	 the	 narrow,
slippery	tracks	and	been	killed	for	food	many	days	ago	and	their	carts	chopped	up	for	fuel.	Maham
Anga	 –	 with	 Akbar	 and	 her	 own	 son,	 both	 well	 swaddled	 against	 the	 cold	 –	 was	 in	 a	 deep	 pannier
hanging	on	one	side	of	a	camel	with	Zainab	in	another	pannier	together	with	some	cooking	utensils	to

balance	the	weight	on	the	other.	The	icy	path	was	so	treacherous	that	Humayun	had	ordered	men	to
walk	beside	the	three	animals	to	lead	them.	But	in	these	temperatures	even	the	camel	seemed	subdued,
trudging	head	down,	ice	crystals	forming	on	the	spikes	of	its	thick	fur.
Behind	came	the	bodyguards,	then	the	meagre	baggage	train	–	a	few	camels	and	mules	wheezing
beneath	their	loads	–	 and	 finally	 the	 rest	 of	 his	 men,	 saddlebags	 bulging,	 shields	 slung	 across	 their
backs,	battleaxes	and	muskets	tied	to	their	saddles.	Like	his,	their	faces	were	half	concealed	by	face
cloths	and	their	heads	huddled	low	into	their	shoulders	against	the	biting,	scouring	winds.	Also	like
him,	 tonight	 they	 would	 dine	 on	 the	 flesh	 of	 an	 old	 mule	 that	 had	 collapsed	 under	 its	 load,	 which
would	 at	 least	 give	 some	 variety	 to	 their	 monotonous	 diet	 of	 rice	 or	 barley	 broth	 and	 flat-baked
bread.
They	looked	a	motley	lot	–	more	like	one	of	his	father ’s	raiding	parties	than	an	emperor ’s	army,
reflected	 Humayun.	 The	 spectacle	 of	 his	 small	 force	 trudging	 through	 this	 snowy	 wilderness
reminded	 him	 sharply	 how	 low	 he	 had	 fallen.	 It	 was	 equally	 sobering	 that,	 now	 he	 had	 crossed	 the
Indus	 to	 ascend	 into	 the	 mountains	 of	 Baluchistan,	 not	 one	 of	 Babur ’s	 four	 sons	 remained	 in
Hindustan.	 It	 was	 as	 if	 Babur ’s	 invasion	 had	 never	 happened	 and	 perhaps,	 though	 he’d	 never
acknowledged	it	before,	he	–	Babur ’s	favoured	and	favourite	son	–	must	bear	some	of	the	blame.	He
hadn’t	understood	the	extent	of	the	danger	posed	by	the	rivalries	within	his	family.	In	particular,	he
had	 underestimated	 the	 depths	 of	 Kamran’s	 enmity.	 Far	 too	 late	 he	 had	 begun	 to	 understand	 that
Kamran	would	rather	see	the	Moghuls	fail	than	abandon	his	own	ambitions	and	allow	him,	Humayun,
to	sit	on	the	Moghul	throne.
Humayun’s	horse	slipped	and	almost	fell,	jolting	him	out	of	his	reverie.	He	threw	his	weight	back
in	the	saddle,	trying	to	help	the	animal	stay	upright,	and	murmuring	encouragement	as,	snorting	in
misty	spirals,	it	managed	to	right	itself.	He	would	be	glad	to	get	clear	of	these	mountains,	he	thought,
and	sank	his	head	deeper	into	his	shoulders	as	the	bitter	wind	nipped	at	him.	Before	long	his	thoughts
returned	to	his	brothers	as	they	so	often	did	during	these	long	days	of	plodding,	this	time	to	Hindal.
Now	that	he	had	time	to	reflect,	he	realised	his	anger	with	his	youngest	half-brother	for	so	guilefully
taking	Kandahar	was	less	than	his	concern	for	his	safety	at	the	hands	of	Kamran	and	Askari.	Though
he	 had	 reassured	 an	 anxious	 Gulbadan	 that	 they	 would	 not	 harm	 her	 brother,	 he	 was	 not	 so	 sure.
Kamran	at	least	might	welcome	an	opportunity	to	rid	himself	of	a	rival.
A	distant	howling,	eerie	and	desolate,	chilling	as	the	wind	which	carried	it,	made	Humayun’s	horse
skitter	in	fright.	Wolves	infested	these	wild,	lonely	mountains.	At	night	they	sometimes	came	so	close
to	the	camp	that	Humayun	had	seen	their	narrow	yellow	eyes	gleaming	out	of	the	darkness	and	in	the
morning	the	ground	around	their	tents	had	been	patterned	with	paw	prints.The	snow	was	falling	more
heavily	now	and	whirling	flakes	veiled	the	steep	path	ahead.
‘Ahmed	Khan,’	Humayun	called	over	his	shoulder.
‘Majesty?’
‘A	 blizzard’s	 coming.	 We’ll	 camp	 here	 for	 the	 night.	 That	 overhanging	 rock	 shelf	 over	 there
should	 provide	 some	 shelter.’	 Humayun	 pointed	 to	 a	 great	 slab	 of	 grey	 rock	 facing	 away	 from	 the
prevailing	wind	which	should	keep	off	the	worst	of	the	wind	and	snow,	and	there	looked	to	be	enough
space	beneath	it	for	their	tents.
Humayun’s	men	tethered	their	horses	and	began	unloading	equipment	and	erecting	the	tents	beneath
the	 overhang.Though	 it	 was	 still	 day,	 the	 light	 was	 getting	 poorer	 by	 the	 minute	 as	 the	 snow	 began
tumbling	in	earnest.	Keeping	their	backs	bowed	against	the	wind	and	struggling	with	numbed	fingers
to	strike	sparks	from	their	tinder	boxes,	two	of	the	men	managed	to	get	a	fire	going	with	some	of	the
brushwood	 the	 mules	 had	 been	 carrying.	 As	 soon	 as	 it	 had	 caught,	 they	 made	 a	 giant	 torch	 from

cloths	dipped	in	oil	and	wound	round	a	tall	stick,	and	drove	it	into	the	ground	outside	Humayun’s	tent.
Within	they	set	up	a	brazier,	filled	it	with	some	of	the	precious	charcoal	brought	from	Bhakkar	and
coaxed	 it	 alight	 –	 not	 for	 Humayun	 and	 Hamida	 but	 for	 Akbar	 who	 would	 be	 sharing	 the	 tent	 with
them	that	night.	In	these	wild	places	Hamida	insisted	that	the	baby	should	sleep	close	by	her.	Maham
Anga	 would	 sleep	 with	 her	 son,	 as	 she	 had	 on	 previous	 nights	 during	 the	 journey,	 in	 an	 adjoining
alcove	screened	by	saddle	blankets.	Inspecting	the	rest	of	his	camp,	Humayun	saw	that	his	men	had
erected	 fewer	 tents	 than	 usual.They’d	 be	 cramming	 in	 close,	 using	 each	 other ’s	 body	 heat	 to	 keep
warm.
‘Majesty,’	came	a	deep	voice.	It	was	Ahmed	Khan,	cloaked	head	mantled	with	snow.	‘Zahid	Beg	and
I	will	post	guards	around	the	perimeter	of	the	camp.	Four	of	your	bodyguards	will	also	be	on	duty
outside	your	tent.’
Humayun	looked	around	him.	Driven	by	the	rising	wind,	the	snow	was	now	whirling	so	thickly	he
could	barely	see	his	commander ’s	face.	The	previous	night	one	of	his	pickets	had	suffered	frostbite
and	the	hakim	feared	his	blackened	toes	would	need	to	be	amputated.	Ahmed	Khan	himself	had	been
coughing	all	day	from	a	chill	he	had	caught	on	a	midnight	tour	of	the	sentries.	‘Thank	you,	Ahmed
Khan,	but	I	don’t	think	we	need	to	worry	in	this	wild	place.	The	men	are	tired	and	the	weather ’s	bitter.
Let	them	rest	tonight.	You	too	–	it	might	help	that	cough	of	yours.’
Despite	 the	 gusting	 winds	 howling	 around	 the	 camp	 and	 buffeting	 his	 tent,	 sleep	 came	 easily	 to
Humayun	 that	 night,	 lying	 with	 Hamida	 in	 his	 arms,	 her	 fur-lined	 cloak	 spread	 on	 top	 of	 the
sheepskins	that	covered	them.	A	brief	wail	from	Akbar	penetrated	his	dreams	but	only	for	a	moment.
Humayun	 moved	 closer	 to	 Hamida,	 drawing	 her	 warm	 body	 in	 against	 his	 as	 he	 sank	 back	 into
slumber.	Then,	suddenly,	he	felt	cold,	sharp	steel	against	his	throat.	He	looked	up	into	a	familiar	pair
of	eyes,	glinting	in	the	light	of	a	flaring	rag	torch	that	another	man	was	holding.	It	couldn’t	be	–	he
was	in	Kandahar	many	miles	away	beyond	the	icy	passes.Yet	there	was	no	mistaking	those	triumphant
eyes	–	green	as	their	father	Babur ’s	had	been	–	above	that	narrow,	hawk-like	nose.	Kamran!
Humayun	 half	 opened	 his	 mouth	 to	 shout	 for	 help	 but	 felt	 the	 tip	 of	 Kamran’s	 dagger	 prick	 his
throat	and	a	trickle	of	blood	run	slowly	down.	In	the	shadows	beyond	the	bed	he	could	make	out	other
figures,	presumably	Kamran’s	henchmen,	watching	in	silence,	weapons	drawn.
‘One	sound	and	I	will	cut	your	throat,’	Kamran	said.	‘You	know	I	mean	it.’
Softly	as	Kamran	had	spoken,	his	words	woke	Hamida,	who	sleepily	pushed	her	hair	back	from	her
face.	As	she	opened	her	eyes,	Humayun	gently	put	a	restraining	hand	on	her	arm.	Taking	in	what	was
happening	she	didn’t	scream	or	cry	out	but	immediately	looked	to	where	Akbar	lay	close	by	her	in
his	basket.
‘You	have	been	lax,	brother.	I	never	thought	to	slip	into	your	camp	so	easily,’	Kamran	said.	‘My
men	have	been	observing	your	progress	towards	the	pass	for	some	days.	The	blizzard	gave	me	my
opportunity.	You	must	have	forgotten	what	our	father	taught	us	in	the	mountains	around	Kabul	–	how
snow	 is	 the	 raider ’s	 friend,	 how	 it	 deadens	 sound.	 Your	 men	 never	 heard	 a	 thing.	 We	 found	 them
packed	tight	in	their	tents	like	dumb	beasts	in	a	byre.’
‘What	have	you	done	with	them	and	the	women?’
Kamran	smiled	but	did	not	answer.
‘How	did	you	know	I	was	coming	this	way?’
‘I	 guessed	 that	 at	 some	 point	 you	 would	 try	 to	 come	 north.	 I	 have	 had	 all	 the	 approaches	 out	 of
Hindustan	watched	for	months.’
‘Where	is	Askari?’
‘In	Kabul.’

‘And	Hindal,	what	have	you	done	with	him?’
‘I	haven’t	killed	him,	if	that’s	what	you	mean.	He’s	a	captive	in	Jalalabad	for	his	disrespect	to	me.’
‘How	can	you	speak	of	“disrespect”	after	how	you	betrayed	me	–	offering	alliance	to	Sher	Shah	to
fight	against	your	own	blood?	Sneaking	like	a	thief	into	Kabul?’
‘You	are	in	no	position	to	criticise.	This	beauty	by	your	side	–	I	heard	you	stole	her	from	Hindal.’
Kamran	 leaned	 closer	 to	 Hamida.	 ‘But	 I	 can	 see	 she’s	 worth	 it.	 I	 wouldn’t	 have	 let	 brotherly	 love,
brotherly	loyalty,	stand	in	my	way	either.’
Humayun	 felt	 Hamida	 tauten	 and	 he	 increased	 his	 pressure	 on	 her	 arm.	 ‘What	 do	 you	 want,
Kamran?	If	you	intended	to	kill	me	I’d	be	dead	already.’
‘True.	I	don’t	share	your	sentimentality	about	blood	bonds	and	so-called	brotherly	love.	For	me,
it’s	always	been	taktya	takhta	–	“throne	or	coffin”.’
‘Then	what’s	stopping	you?’
‘The	only	reason	I	haven’t	drawn	my	blade	across	your	jugular	–	tempted	as	I	am	–	is	that	it	would
stir	 up	 blood	 feuds	 among	 the	 clans.	 But	 if	 I	 am	 seen	 to	 have	 defeated	 you	 and	 acted	 with	 mercy,
chiefs	once	loyal	to	you	will	give	me	their	support.	You	are	more	useful	to	me	alive	and	humiliated
than	dead.’
‘So	what	do	you	want?’
‘Your	promise	to	leave	Hindustan	and	our	ancestral	homelands	and	go	so	far	away	that	I	can	forget
you	ever	existed.’
‘Go	where?’
‘Persia	has	a	pleasant	climate	and	you’ll	find	the	soft	living	there	to	your	taste	–	plenty	of	opium
and	plenty	of	beautiful	women.’
‘And	if	I	refuse?’
‘I	will	kill	you	here	and	now	and	face	the	difficulties	with	the	clans.	I	will	enjoy	feeling	your	warm
blood	on	my	hands.’
‘I’ve	never	understood	why	you	hate	me.	It	wasn’t	my	fault	our	father	chose	me.’
‘Wasn’t	 it?	 It	 was	 your	 fault	 he	 seldom	 gave	 me	 a	 thought.	 You	 played	 the	 perfect	 warrior,	 the
shining	emblem	of	what	he	hoped	to	achieve.	I’ve	despised	your	vainglorious	conceit	ever	since	we
were	boys	and	you	assumed	I	was	happy	to	trail	admiringly	in	your	wake.	When	we	became	men	you
assumed	you	could	continue	to	patronise	me	.	.	.	But	my	ambition	is	as	great	as	yours	.	.	.	I	want	the
empire	our	father	forged	with	his	blood	and	sweat	and	I	deserve	it	more	than	any	of	Babur ’s	sons.
Askari	already	accepts	this	and	will	do	what	I	say.	Hindal	will	learn	to,	if	he’s	wise.When	I	am	ready	I
will	take	on	Sher	Shah	and	drive	him	out.	The	khutba	will	be	read	in	my	name	in	Delhi	and	Agra	and	I
and	my	sons	–	not	yours	–	will	sit	on	the	Moghul	throne.	You	had	your	chance	and	you	failed.’
‘Our	father	knew	what	you	were	like,	that	you	were	devious,	self-serving	and	my	enemy	.	.	.	that
you	were	a	traitor	.	.	.	he	tried	to	warn	me.’
‘Shut	up.’	Kamran’s	voice	had	risen	and	Akbar	began	to	cry.
‘Your	son	sounds	strong	and	lusty.’	Kamran’s	green	eyes	flicked	across	to	the	basket	on	Hamida’s
side	of	the	bed.	‘Let	me	see	my	nephew,’	he	ordered	Hamida.
She	glanced	anxiously	at	Humayun,	who	nodded.	Gathering	her	robes	around	her,	she	slipped	from
the	bed,	lifted	Akbar	from	his	basket	and	carried	him	slowly	towards	Kamran.
‘Watch	my	brother.	If	he	moves	so	much	as	a	muscle,	kill	him,’	Kamran	said	to	his	men,	three	of
whom	 stepped	 forward	 from	 the	 shadows	 towards	 Humayun.	 Meanwhile,	 Kamran	 withdrew	 his
dagger	from	Humayun’s	throat,	slid	it	into	its	scabbard	and	moved	towards	Hamida.
If	 only	 Hamida	 and	 Akbar	 had	 not	 been	 with	 him,	 he	 could	 have	 taken	 Kamran	 now,	 Humayun

thought,	 calculating	 the	 distance	 between	 himself,	 his	 brother	 and	 his	 brother ’s	 men.	 He	 knew	 he
could	leap	up	and	grab	Kamran	as	a	shield	before	one	of	his	men	had	time	to	fire	an	arrow	or	throw	a
dagger.	 But	 as	 it	 was	 he	 could	 do	 nothing	 but	 watch	 as	 Kamran	 pulled	 back	 the	 thick	 sheepskin	 in
which	Akbar	was	wrapped	and	inspected	the	small,	bawling	face.
‘Give	him	to	me.’
Again	Hamida	looked	across	at	Humayun	and	again	he	nodded.
Kamran	took	hold	of	Akbar,	who	seemed	to	like	the	change	and	suddenly	stopped	his	crying.	For	a
moment	Kamran	scrutinised	his	face.‘Well,	do	you	accept	my	terms,	Humayun?’	As	he	spoke	Kamran
took	 one	 of	 Akbar ’s	 tiny	 hands	 in	 his,	 but	 his	 eyes	 as	 he	 looked	 across	 at	 Humayun	 were	 as
unconcerned	and	cold	as	if	he	were	handling	a	piece	of	meat.
‘I	accept,	but	only	because	I	have	no	choice.	But	I	tell	you	this.	One	day	I	will	make	you	pay	for
what	you	have	done.’
‘Remember,	I	hold	your	heir	in	my	hands.	Provoke	me	further	and	I’ll	order	my	men	to	take	him
outside	 and	 lay	 him	 naked	 in	 the	 snow.	 How	 long	 do	 you	 think	 he	 will	 last	 before	 the	 cold	 or	 the
wolves	kill	him?’
Hamida	 gasped	 and	 Humayun	 watched	 helpless	 as	 Kamran	 chucked	 a	 laughing	 Akbar	 under	 the
chin.
‘No	 words,	 my	 silver-tongued	 half-brother,	 not	 even	 of	 farewell?	 It’s	 not	 like	 you,	 the	 great
emperor,	 to	 be	 so	 discourteous.’	 Their	 eyes	 locked	 but	 Humayun	 remained	 grimly	 silent.	 With	 a
contemptuous	shrug,	Kamran	stepped	towards	the	entrance	of	the	tent,	still	cradling	Akbar.
‘Give	me	back	my	child!’	Hamida	cried	out.
Kamran	turned	back	to	her.	‘I	don’t	trust	Humayun,	even	though	he’s	so	fond	of	boasting	about	how
honourable	 he	 is.	 I	 need	 a	 guarantee	 that	 he	 will	 do	 what	 he	 has	 promised	 and	 go	 to	 Persia.	 My
nephew	is	that	guarantee	.	.	.	’
Before	 he’d	 finished	 speaking,	 Hamida	 flew	 at	 him,	 trying	 to	 pull	 Akbar	 away.	 As	 Akbar	 started
screaming	again,	Kamran	pushed	Hamida	hard.	As	she	fell	back,	catching	her	head	against	the	edge
of	a	wooden	chest,	Kamran	handed	Akbar	to	one	of	his	men.	‘Take	the	child	outside,’	he	ordered.
But	Hamida	hadn’t	finished	with	Kamran.	Though	dazed,	she	struggled	up	and	launched	herself	at
him	again,	raking	his	face	with	her	nails	and	drawing	blood.	Kamran	took	her	by	the	shoulders	and
pushed	her	off	him.	‘It’s	a	shame.	With	so	much	fighting	spirit	you	would	have	made	a	better	empress
than	your	husband	has	been	an	emperor.’
At	that	moment	there	was	a	movement	behind	the	curtained-off	alcove	and	the	tall	figure	of	Maham
Anga	appeared.	In	the	shock	and	confusion	Humayun	had	forgotten	all	about	her.	Similarly	taken	by
surprise,	Kamran	released	Hamida	and	drew	his	dagger.	‘Who	are	you?’	Blood	was	running	down	his
cheek	where	Hamida	had	scratched	him.
Maham	 Anga	 ignored	 Kamran	 but	 addressed	 herself	 to	 Hamida.‘Majesty,	 I	 heard	 everything.	 As
Akbar ’s	milk-mother,	I	should	go	with	him.	I	swear	to	you	that	I	will	protect	him	with	my	life.’	The
expression	on	her	handsome,	high-cheekboned	face	was	stubborn.
Hamida’s	eyes	were	shining	with	tears	but	she	controlled	herself	as	she	turned	to	Kamran.	‘This	is
Maham	Anga,	my	son’s	wet-nurse.	I	ask	that	you	take	her	with	you	to	care	for	my	son.’
‘She	 may	 come.’	 Kamran	 looked	 again	 at	 Humayun.	 ‘Your	 women	 are	 braver	 than	 your
warriors.We	captured	your	men	as	they	slept	–	they	are	tied	up	in	their	tents	like	chickens	for	market.
The	 only	 blood	 shed	 tonight	 was	 drawn	 by	 your	 wife.	 Make	 haste,	 Maham	 Anga.	 We	 ride	 in	 five
minutes.’	Turning,	he	ducked	out	of	the	tent.
As	 the	 two	 women	 embraced,	 Humayun	 saw	 Maham	 Anga	 whisper	 something	 in	 Hamida’s	 ear.

Then,	under	the	watchful	eye	of	Kamran’s	soldiers,	the	wet-nurse	hurriedly	collected	her	own	son	and
a	 few	 of	 his	 and	 Akbar ’s	 things	 as	 well	 as	 her	 own	 and	 was	 escorted	 from	 the	 tent.	 Moments	 later,
Hamida	and	Humayun	heard	the	muffled	sound	of	hooves	on	snow	and	then	all	went	quiet.	Leaping
up,	 Humayun	 rushed	 outside.	 The	 blizzard	 was	 over	 and	 the	 snow	 that	 had	 fallen	 had	 softened	 the
harsh	landscape.	So	pure	and	still,	it	was	a	scene	of	almost	perfect	beauty.

Part	III
Farewell	the	Koh-i-Nur

Chapter	15
Shah	Tahmasp
At	daybreak,	Humayun	gathered	his	men	around	him	in	the	snow,	their	breath	rising	in	spirals	in	the
bitterly	 cold	 air.	 None	 had	 been	 seriously	 injured.	 They	 had	 been	 pinioned	 and	 bound	 with	 leather
thongs	before	they	realised	they	were	under	attack.	But	their	mood	was	as	subdued	as	his	own	and	he
understood	why	–	their	warrior	code	had	been	violated.	In	his	heart,	every	man	wished	he	had	had	the
chance	to	fight.	The	shame	of	being	taken	unawares	was	a	greater	hurt	than	a	wound	to	the	flesh.	At
least	a	scar	was	a	badge	of	honour.Where	was	the	glory	in	being	caught	asleep	in	a	tent?
‘None	of	you	is	responsible	for	what	happened	last	night.	It	was	I	who	decided	not	to	post	guards.’
‘Should	we	ride	in	pursuit?’	asked	Zahid	Beg.
‘No.’
‘But	why,	Majesty?	They’ve	no	more	than	an	hour	or	two’s	start	on	us	.	.	.	’
‘I	gave	my	promise,	Zahid	Beg,	and	even	if	Kamran	is	not,	I	am	a	man	of	my	word.	Besides,	he	has
taken	my	son.	He	threatened	to	kill	Akbar	before	my	very	eyes	and	I	believed	him.’
‘But	the	lives	of	young	Timurid	princes	are	sacred.	That	has	always	been	our	way	.	.	.	’
‘But	it	is	not	my	half-brother ’s.	Ambition	possesses	him	and	he	won’t	let	anything	stand	in	the	way
of	his	dreams	of	glory.	If	I	give	him	the	excuse,	he	will	murder	my	son.’
Humayun	grimaced.	Hadn’t	he	just	said	exactly	the	same	thing	to	Hamida,	weeping	in	the	arms	of
Gulbadan	 who,	 with	 the	 other	 women,	 he	 had	 found	 tied	 up	 and	 gagged?	 Though	 badly	 shaken,
Gulbadan	 had	 managed	 to	 recover	 her	 composure	 but	 Hamida	 remained	 not	 just	 inconsolable	 but
hysterical.	‘Rescue	our	son!’	she	had	screamed	at	him.	‘If	you	have	a	man’s	blood	in	your	veins,	how
can	you	think	about	doing	anything	else?’
But	for	the	first	time	since	their	marriage	he	had	ignored	her.	Something	dark	lurked	in	his	halfbrother ’s	soul.	He	had	seen	it	as	their	eyes	had	met	over	Akbar ’s	innocent	head.	To	achieve	what	he
wanted	Kamran	would	do	anything	.	.	.	That	was	why,	Humayun	had	told	Hamida	as	he	held	her	tightly
in	 his	 arms,	 they	 must	 not,	 dare	 not	 pursue	 Kamran.	 At	 least	 Maham	 Anga	 was	 with	 Akbar,	 he	 had
said,	 stroking	 Hamida’s	 hair,	 and,	 for	 the	 moment,	 they	 must	 trust	 in	 her.	 It	 seemed	 that	 confidence
was	not	misplaced.	Between	her	sobs,	Hamida	had	told	him	what	Maham	Anga	had	whispered	in	those
final	 moments	 before	 leaving	 –	 that	 she	 was	 carrying	 a	 knife	 whose	 blade	 had	 been	 treated	 with
poison.Anyone	attempting	to	hurt	Akbar	would	die	for	it.
Pulling	himself	back	to	the	present	Humayun	continued	his	address.	‘My	men,	there	is	something
else	I	must	tell	you.	I	also	promised	my	half-brother	to	leave	these	lands	and	go	to	Persia.	I	do	not
think	 Shah	 Tahmasp	 who	 rules	 there	 will	 deny	 me	 sanctuary	 but	 the	 journey	 will	 be	 hard,	 across
hundreds	of	miles	of	harsh	and	icy	terrain.	Before	it	is	ended	we	may	meet	danger	and	deprivation
beyond	 anything	 we	 have	 yet	 known.	 I	 do	 not	 order	 you	 to	 ride	 with	 me	 .	 .	 .	 if	 you	 wish	 to	 return
home,	do	so	with	honour	.	.	.	but	if	you	come	with	me,	I	pledge	in	the	name	of	my	father	Babur	and
my	ancestor	Timur	that	once	I	have	fulfilled	my	promise	to	go	to	Persia	our	stay	there	will	be	short.	I
will	reclaim	every	inch	of	my	usurped	lands	and	those	who	ride	with	me	–	my	ichkis	–	will	share	the

glory	of	events	that	their	descendants	will	speak	of	with	pride	a	hundred	years	hence.’
Humayun	 paused.	 The	 expressions	 on	 his	 men’s	 faces	 told	 him	 that	 his	 words	 –	 and	 the	 steely
determination	behind	them	–	had	found	their	mark.	Few	would	abandon	him,	not	yet	anyway.	He	must
find	ways	to	live	up	to	their	trust.

The	diamond-bright	tips	of	the	mountains	all	around	shone	with	a	brilliant,	almost	magical	beauty	–
towers	of	ice	from	a	fable.	Yet	the	sight	did	not	move	Humayun	as,	a	month	later,	he	rode	at	the	head
of	his	column	as	it	edged	slowly	upwards	through	a	narrow	pass.	On	the	advice	of	the	Baluchi	guides
who	 had	 agreed	 to	 take	 them	 to	 the	 border	 with	 Persia,	 Humayun	 had	 ordered	 his	 men	 to	 make	 as
little	 noise	 as	 possible.Yet	 as,	 shading	 his	 eyes,	 he	 looked	 up	 at	 the	 glistening	 snow	 and	 ice	 fields
above,	he	knew	–	as	they	all	did	–	that	at	any	moment	an	avalanche	might	roll	down	and	obliterate
them.
Danger	was	all	around.	Only	yesterday	–	and	even	though	Humayun	had	sent	men	ahead	to	probe
the	trackless,	icy	ground	with	the	shafts	of	their	spears	to	make	sure	it	was	solid	–	he	had	nearly	lost	a
man	 down	 a	 crevasse	 concealed	 by	 a	 fall	 of	 fresh	 snow.	 Though	 the	 mule	 he	 had	 been	 leading	 had
tumbled	into	the	icy	void,	by	an	extraordinary	stroke	of	good	fortune	the	man	had	managed	to	grip
on	to	a	rock	ledge	some	ten	feet	below.	Two	of	Ahmed	Khan’s	scouts	had	hauled	him	back	up	on	a
rope.
Nature	was	not	the	sole	threat	to	their	survival.	Travellers	only	passed	through	this	wild,	desolate
region	from	necessity.	Brigands	–	‘ghouls	of	the	wastes’	the	Baluchi	guides	called	them,	spitting	on
the	 ground	 –	 lurked	 in	 these	 high	 places.	 Some	 even	 said	 they	 did	 not	 baulk	 at	 eating	 human	 flesh.
More	than	once	Humayun	had	thought	he	detected	movement	among	the	snow-covered	rocks	above
them	 but	 though	 he	 had	 looked	 hard	 he	 had	 seen	 nothing.	 All	 the	 same,	 the	 sense	 of	 watching	 eyes
stayed	with	him	and	he	knew	that	Ahmed	Khan	felt	it	too.	It	would	be	typically	devious	of	Kamran	–
knowing	which	way	Humayun	was	likely	to	go	and	that	he	had	fewer	than	two	hundred	men	–	to	have
bribed	 bandits	 to	 attack	 him.	 Humayun’s	 death,	 if	 seen	 to	 be	 at	 the	 hands	 of	 others,	 would	 be	 more
than	convenient	for	Kamran.	Whatever	the	weather,	Humayun	posted	sentries	every	night.
But	 he	 knew	 that	 the	 greatest	 risk	 of	 all	 was	 their	 growing	 physical	 weakness,	 because	 with
weakness	 came	 carelessness.	 Almost	 all	 their	 food	 –	 the	 grain,	 the	 dried	 fruit	 –	 was	 gone.	 The	 last
three	nights’	meals	had	consisted	of	the	fibrous	flesh	of	a	horse	boiled	in	a	helmet	over	a	small	fire.
Soon	they’d	be	unable	to	cook	anything	–	their	wood	and	charcoal	were	almost	exhausted.
As	 Humayun	 shivered	 with	 cold	 –	 his	 very	 bones	 aching	 with	 it	 –	 he	 recalled	 his	 father	 Babur ’s
stories	of	crossing	the	Hindu	Kush,	of	men	being	dashed	to	pieces	by	sudden	falls	of	ice,	of	drifts	so
deep	that	he	and	his	men	had	taken	it	in	turns	to	be	‘snow	tramplers’,	beating	it	down	to	force	a	way
through.	Babur	had,	by	sheer	determination,	overcome	the	obstacles	and	so	must	he.
Later	 that	 afternoon,	 as	 they	 made	 camp	 on	 a	 saddle	 of	 land	 that	 seemed	 safe	 from	 avalanches,
Humayun	 had	 another	 reason	 to	 remember	 Babur ’s	 tales	 of	 survival	 in	 the	 cold.	 Ahmed	 Khan,
muffled	in	thick	sheepskin	robes,	a	flat-brimmed	woollen	Baluchi	cap	pulled	low	and	almost	all	his
face	 concealed	 by	 his	 face	 cloth	 so	 that	 only	 his	 amber-brown	 eyes	 were	 visible,	 came	 stumbling
over,	leather	boots	slipping	on	the	icy	ground.
‘Majesty,	it	was	so	bitterly	cold	these	past	nights	that	two	of	my	men	got	badly	frozen	feet	on	picket

duty.	The	hakim	is	with	them	now	.	.	.	’
‘What	does	he	say?’
‘That	he	must	amputate	–	in	one	case	three	toes	must	come	off,	but	in	the	other	the	whole	foot	.	.	.	’
‘I	will	come.’
The	 hakim	 and	 the	 two	 soldiers	 were	 inside	 a	 small	 tent	 where	 a	 pitiful	 little	 fire	 burned	 in	 a
brazier.	 Humayun	 saw	 that	 one	 of	 the	 men	 who	 were	 lying	 with	 their	 pantaloons	 slit	 and	 bare	 legs
exposed	was	Darya.	The	young	man	was	looking	very	pale	as	he	watched	the	hakim	pass	the	blade	of
his	knife	through	the	feeble	flame	to	cleanse	it.	Another	broader	blade	was	stuck	into	the	heart	of	the
fire,	 no	 doubt	 being	 heated	 to	 red-hot	 to	 cauterise	 the	 wounds.	 Humayun	 squatted	 by	 Darya	 and
examined	his	right	leg.	The	foot	was	black,	puffy	and	swollen	to	well	above	his	ankle	while	an	evilsmelling	greenish	pus	oozed	from	beneath	the	few	remaining	toenails.	‘The	hakim	has	told	you	what
he	must	do?’	Darya	nodded	but	Humayun	could	see	terror	in	his	eyes.	‘Courage.	The	hakim	is	skilled.
God	willing,	this	will	save	your	life.’
The	 other	 soldier	 –	 a	 Badakhshani	 –	 looked	 even	 younger	 than	 Darya.	 Three	 of	 his	 toes	 were
swollen	and	discoloured	and	he	seemed	unable	to	withdraw	his	gaze	from	the	hakim’s	 blade,	 which
would	soon	be	cutting	through	his	flesh	and	bone.
‘Ahmed	Khan	and	I	will	help	you,	hakim,’	said	Humayun.	‘Which	one	is	first?’
The	hakim	gestured	to	the	Badakhshani.	While	Ahmed	Khan	took	the	young	man	by	the	shoulders
to	hold	him	down,	Humayun	knelt	by	his	leg	which	he	grasped	with	both	hands	just	above	the	knee.	It
took	all	his	strength	to	hold	the	leg	steady	as	the	hakim	went	to	work	and	the	Badakhshani,	trying	hard
not	to	cry	out,	arced	in	agony.	But	the	hakim	was	quick.	With	just	three	precise	motions	he	severed	the
blackened	toes,	then	he	cauterised	the	bleeding	wounds	and	bandaged	them	tightly.
Now	 it	 was	 Darya’s	 turn.	 The	 hakim	 looked	 grave	 as	 once	 again	 he	 passed	 his	 knife	 through	 the
flames.	‘This	will	take	much	longer,	Majesty.	I	wish	I	had	opium	to	give	him	to	deaden	the	pain	.	.	.	I
have	seen	stronger	warriors	than	him	die	of	shock	during	such	an	operation.’
Humayun	glanced	over	his	shoulder	to	where	Darya	was	lying	very	still,	pale	face	covered	with	a
sheen	of	sweat.
‘If	he	were	unconscious,	would	that	help?’
The	hakim	nodded.
Humayun	went	over	to	Darya.	‘All	will	be	well,’	he	said,	kneeling	down	beside	him.	‘Try	to	sit	up	a
moment,	there	is	something	I	must	tell	you	.	.	.	’	As	a	puzzled-looking	Darya	raised	himself	on	his
elbows,	without	warning	Humayun	swung	his	balled	fist	at	him,	catching	him	hard	on	the	point	of	the
chin.	The	young	man	instantly	fell	back.	Pulling	back	his	eyelids	–	as	he	had	done	many	a	time	to	both
friend	and	foe	on	the	battlefield	–	Humayun	saw	he	was	out	cold.	His	aim	had	been	good	.	.	.
‘Hakim,	 do	 what	 you	 must.’	 As	 Humayun	 ducked	 out	 of	 the	 tent	 into	 the	 freezing	 air,	 leaving
Ahmed	Khan	to	assist	the	doctor,	he	caught	the	rasping	sound	of	metal	sawing	through	bone	and	his
spirits	sank	yet	lower.	How	was	he	going	to	justify	his	men’s	confidence	and	repay	their	sacrifices?
He	 looked	 up	 into	 the	 darkening	 sky	 and	 for	 a	 moment	 longed	 for	 a	 draught	 of	 Gulrukh’s	 opiumlaced	 wine	 to	 wash	 away	 his	 cares	 and	 responsibilities	 and	 waft	 him	 through	 the	 heavens.Then	 the
image	of	Khanzada’s	face	seemed	to	coalesce	in	the	stars,	silently	reminding	him	that	it	was	not	his
destiny	to	be	carefree	and	that	with	it	came	burdens	and	obligations.	He	pulled	his	cloak	tighter	about
him	and	determined	to	do	a	round	of	the	sentries,	warning	them	to	keep	moving	and	stamping	their
feet	to	avoid	frostbite.
But	three	days	later	it	seemed	that,	perhaps,	the	worst	might	be	over.	As	they	snaked	down	a	narrow
winding	 track	 the	 biting	 wind	 suddenly	 abated,	 and	 looking	 down	 through	 drifting	 wisps	 of	 cloud

Humayun	made	out	a	circle	of	snow-covered	houses	and	smoke	rising	from	what	he	guessed	must	be
a	 caravanserai.	 Muffled	 figures	 were	 grouped	 in	 its	 courtyard	 and	 he	 could	 see	 animals	 wandering
about.	‘Is	that	one	of	the	settlements	you	spoke	of?’	he	asked	one	of	the	Baluchi	guides.
‘Yes,	 Majesty.We	 are	 descending	 to	 what	 we	 call	 the	 gamsir	 –	 the	 mountain	 meadowlands	 where
farmers	and	herdsmen	have	their	winter	habitations.	We	will	be	able	to	purchase	provisions	and	fuel
there	.	.	.	and	even	rest	for	a	few	days	before	travelling	on.’
The	 prospect	 of	 supplies	 gladdened	 Humayun	 but	 he	 wouldn’t	 delay	 a	 moment	 longer	 than
necessary.	The	pain	in	Hamida’s	eyes	every	time	he	looked	at	her	matched	his	own	at	the	thought	of
Akbar	 so	 many	 miles	 away	 and	 in	 Kamran’s	 hands.	 The	 sooner	 they	 reached	 Persia,	 the	 sooner	 he
could	begin	to	make	plans	again.
‘How	far	from	here	to	the	border?’
‘The	 Persian	 province	 of	 Seistan	 lies	 just	 over	 the	 Helmand	 river	 about	 eighty	 miles	 from	 here,
Majesty.’
‘Over	what	kind	of	terrain?’
‘Mostly	downhill	from	now	on.	As	we	near	the	Helmand	it	flattens	into	desert.’
‘How	many	days	before	we	reach	the	river?’
‘No	more	than	ten	to	twelve	to	reach	the	ford	I	know	of.’
That	night,	after	they	had	reached	the	settlement	and	eaten	their	fill	for	the	first	time	in	many	days,
Humayun	joined	Hamida	in	their	tent.	‘Now	that	we	are	getting	close	to	his	lands,	I	must	write	to	Shah
Tahmasp	 asking	 him	 to	 receive	 us.	 If	 we	 approach	 his	 territory	 unannounced,	 the	 Persian	 troops
guarding	his	borders	may	think	our	intentions	hostile.	I	will	entrust	the	letter	to	Jauhar	as	my	envoy.
He	 will	 carry	 it	 over	 the	 Helmand	 river	 and	 seek	 out	 the	 governor	 or	 some	 other	 high-ranking
official	 to	 explain	 why	 we	 have	 come	 and	 to	 request	 to	 be	 allowed	 to	 carry	 my	 letter	 to	 the	 shah
without	delay.’
As	 he	 spoke,	 Humayun	 settled	 himself	 cross-legged	 at	 a	 low	 table	 where,	 by	 the	 light	 of	 an	 oil
lamp,	 he	 began	 mixing	 his	 ink.	 He	 knew	 how	 much	 depended	 on	 his	 choice	 of	 words.	 During	 the
journey	 he	 had	 weighed	 carefully	 what	 he	 must	 say	 and	 now	 began	 to	 write	 fluidly	 and	 without
hesitation,	 speaking	 the	 words	 out	 loud	 to	 Hamida.	 It	 was	 fortunate	 that	 Persian	 was	 a	 familiar
language	to	the	Moghuls	so	that	he	had	no	need	of	a	translator.
First	came	a	paragraph	of	graceful	courtesies,	including	repeated	hopes	for	the	shah’s	prolonged
good	health	and	the	success	of	his	reign.	Then	Humayun	reminded	Tahmasp	that	many	years	earlier
his	father	Shah	Ismail	had	not	only	assisted	Humayun’s	father	Babur	against	his	enemies	but	rescued
Babur ’s	 sister	 Khanzada	 from	 captivity	 in	 the	 haram	 of	 the	 Moghuls’	 implacable	 enemy,	 the	 Uzbek
chieftain	Shaibani	Khan.	Humayun	did	not	mention	that	–	as	Shah	Tahmasp	would	very	well	know	–
the	alliance	between	Babur	and	Ismail	had	not	lasted	long.	Instead,	he	eulogised	the	fact	that	these	two
great	rulers	had	once	joined	forces	to	destroy	a	common	enemy.
Next,	Humayun	decided	to	make	a	direct	plea:	‘I	have	suffered	many	reverses.	An	impostor	from
Bengal,	 Sher	 Shah,	 rules	 in	 my	 place	 in	 Hindustan	 while	 my	 half-brothers	 have	 stolen	 Kabul	 and
Kandahar	from	me	and	hold	my	infant	son	hostage.	You	too	are	an	emperor	–	a	very	great	one	–	and
you	will,	I	am	certain,	understand	and	sympathise	with	my	plight.	I	ask	you	to	be	gracious	enough	to
receive	me,	my	family	and	my	small	force	into	Persia.’
‘What	 do	 you	 think?’	 Humayun	 asked	 Hamida	 as,	 having	 rounded	 off	 the	 letter	 with	 a	 few	 last
formal	courtesies,	he	laid	down	his	pen.
For	 a	 few	 moments	 Hamida	 thought.	 ‘It	 is	 eloquent,	 open	 and	 frank.	 It	 should	 sway	 the	 shah,	 but
whether	 it	 will	 who	 can	 say.	 So	 often	 we’ve	 raised	 our	 hopes	 and	 expectations,	 only	 to	 have	 them

dashed.’

‘Majesty,	there	is	the	ford.’
Shading	 his	 eyes,	 Humayun	 followed	 the	 guide’s	 pointing	 finger	 and	 saw	 across	 the	 flat,	 grey
ground	the	glint	of	a	watercourse	–	the	Helmand	river.	A	squat	tower	with	a	long	banner	streaming
from	 its	 roof	 stood	 on	 the	 opposite	 bank	 –	 presumably	 a	 Persian	 fortress	 guarding	 the	 crossing.	 It
must	be	three	or	four	days	at	least	since	Jauhar	had	passed	through	this	way,	so	the	commander	of	the
fort	should	be	expecting	Humayun’s	arrival.	All	the	same,	it	was	as	well	to	be	cautious.
‘Ahmed	Khan,	send	scouts	closer	to	the	fort	to	see	what	they	can	find	out	while	the	rest	of	us	halt
here.’
‘I	will	go	myself,	Majesty.’	Summoning	two	of	his	men,	Ahmed	Khan	cantered	off,	raising	a	cloud
of	powdery	grey	dust.
Humayun	rode	slowly	back	to	the	covered	wooden	cart	–	one	of	several	he	had	purchased	at	the
settlement	 to	 transport	 the	 women	 and	 the	 sick	 –	 in	 which	 Hamida	 and	 Gulbadan	 were	 travelling.
Pushing	 his	 head	 inside	 the	 wool	 hangings,	 he	 saw	 that	 Hamida	 was	 asleep	 and	 that	 Gulbadan	 was
writing	–	doubtless	that	diary	of	hers.They	both	looked	pale	and	thin.
‘We	have	reached	the	river,’	he	said	quietly	so	as	not	to	wake	Hamida.	‘If	Ahmed	Khan	reports	that
all	is	well	and	the	Persians	do	not	object,	we	will	cross	and	make	camp.	How	is	Hamida?’
‘She	still	says	so	very	little	.	.	.	She	seldom	shares	her	feelings	or	her	thoughts,	even	with	me.’
‘Try	to	make	her	understand,	as	I	have,	that	I	won’t	rest	until	we	have	our	son	again.	Everything	I
am	doing	.	.	.	will	have	to	do	over	the	months	ahead	.	.	.	will	above	all	be	for	Akbar.’
‘She	knows	that	she	must	be	strong	for	you	but	she	worries	how	the	shah	will	receive	us	.	.	.	and
how	Kamran	is	treating	Akbar.’
As	Hamida	stirred,	Humayun	turned	away	and	pulling	back	the	hangings	returned	to	the	front	of	the
column.	 He	 didn’t	 have	 to	 wait	 long	 for	 news.	 Barely	 an	 hour	 after	 Ahmed	 Khan	 and	 his	 men	 had
ridden	away,	Humayun	saw	them	returning.	Close	behind	them	were	two	other	riders.	As	they	drew
closer	Humayun	made	out	that,	though	one	was	a	stranger,	the	other	was	the	tall	figure	of	Jauhar.	Why
wasn’t	he	on	his	way	to	the	shah?	Had	the	shah	denied	them	entry	to	Persia?	Had	Kamran	somehow
won	his	favour?	Full	of	anxiety,	he	kicked	his	horse	forward	to	meet	them.
‘Majesty.’	Ahmed	Khan	was	smiling.	‘All	is	well.	This,’	he	indicated	the	stranger,	‘is	Abbas	Beg,
the	governor	of	Seistan,	who	has	come	to	escort	you	into	Persia.’
Abbas	Beg,	a	tall,	black-bearded	man	of	about	forty,	magnificently	dressed	in	dark	purple	velvet
and	 with	 a	 white	 egret’s	 feather	 secured	 by	 a	 jewelled	 clasp	 to	 his	 tall	 cap,	 dismounted	 and	 bowed
before	Humayun.	‘Majesty,	I	have	despatched	your	letter	to	the	shah.	Our	swift	post	riders	can	cover
eighty	 miles	 a	 day.	 I	 requested	 your	 envoy	 to	 remain	 behind	 to	 advise	 me	 how	 best	 to	 receive	 you.
Everything	is	ready.	You	only	have	to	cross	the	ford.’
A	tremendous	weight	lifted	from	Humayun.	For	the	first	time	in	months	he	need	not	worry	where
his	family	and	his	men	were	to	sleep,	whether	there	was	food,	whether	they	were	safe	from	attack.	For
a	moment	he	closed	his	eyes	and	bowed	his	head	in	gratitude,	then	drawing	himself	up	said,	‘I	thank
you,	Abbas	Beg.	Your	words	are	very	welcome.’
‘Then,	in	the	name	of	Shah	Tahmasp,	Lord	of	the	World,	I	welcome	you	to	Persia.’

One	hundred	attendants	were	sweeping	the	road	ahead	and	sprinkling	it	with	rosewater	to	subdue	the
dust.	Ahead	of	Humayun	and	his	party	trotted	one	thousand	gorgeously	caparisoned	horsemen	whom
the	 shah	 had	 sent	 to	 escort	 them	 to	 his	 capital,	 Kazvin,	 seven	 hundred	 miles	 to	 the	 northwest.
Humayun’s	own	party	was	no	less	magnificently	mounted	on	Persian	horses	–	sable	black	with	goldmounted	bridle	and	saddle	for	Humayun.	Hamida	and	Gulbadan	were	in	a	gilded,	velvet-lined	wagon
drawn	by	white	oxen,	horns	adorned	with	ribbons	of	Moghul	green.
Shah	Tahmasp’s	response	to	his	letter	had	reached	Humayun	just	three	weeks	after	he	had	crossed
into	Persia.	Three	pages	of	extravagant	compliments	had	ended	with	the	words:	You	are	my	brother,	a
precious	 jewel	 of	 sovereignty	 whose	 bright	 magnificence	 makes	 dim	 the	 world-illuminating	 sun.	 My
days	will	seem	empty	until	I	have	the	happiness	of	receiving	you	at	my	court	in	Kazvin.
The	shah	had	issued	firmans,	written	orders,	to	the	governor	of	every	town	and	province	through
which	Humayun	would	be	passing,	giving	the	most	minute	instructions	for	his	comfort	and	pleasure.
Humayun	 knew	 this	 because	 the	 shah	 had	 sent	 him	 copies	 of	 these	 firmans	 –	 written	 on	 thick	 goldbordered	 paper	 –	 in	 an	 ivory	 casket	 so	 that	 my	 brother	 may	 know	 that	 I	 have	 spared	 no	 effort	 to
welcome	him.
The	shah	had	decreed	exactly	where	the	column	should	halt	each	night	so	that,	as	they	rode	in,	tents
of	 fine	 embroidered	 white	 cloth	 with	 awnings	 of	 velvet	 and	 silk	 were	 already	 erected	 and	 waiting.
Every	 night	 brought	 another	 exquisite	 feast	 –	 golden	 platters	 of	 sweet	 white	 bread	 baked	 with	 milk
and	butter	and	sprinkled	with	poppy	and	fennel	seeds,	five	hundred	different	savoury	dishes	–	duck
simmered	in	a	walnut	sauce,	lamb	stewed	with	quinces	and	dried	limes	–	nuts	of	every	kind	covered	in
gold	and	silver	leaf,	dried	apricots	stuffed	with	chopped	nuts	and	honey	and	pyramids	of	sweetmeats
scented	with	rosewater	and	sprinkled	with	jewel-like	pomegranate	seeds.
Every	day	saw	the	arrival	of	fresh	gifts	–	jewelled	daggers	and	coats	cut	from	cloth	of	gold	and
flowered	brocades	for	Humayun	and	amber	and	exquisite	perfumes	sent	by	the	shah’s	sister,	Shahzada
Sultanam,	to	Hamida	and	Gulbadan.	The	rest	of	Humayun’s	retinue	was	not	forgotten	–	Shah	Tahmasp
sent	daggers	and	swords	made	by	the	finest	armourers	for	his	men.	Everyone	had	new	clothes.	The
ragged,	weary	band	that	had	crossed	the	Helmand	river	had	been	transformed.
But	 as	 the	 weeks	 passed	 and	 they	 were	 drawing	 nearer	 to	 Kazvin,	 passing	 through	 orchards	 of
peach	 and	 apricot	 trees	 and	 along	 riverbanks	 lined	 with	 drooping	 willows,	 Humayun	 had	 still	 not
found	 an	 answer	 to	 the	 question	 that	 kept	 troubling	 him.	 Why	 had	 Shah	 Tahmasp	 gone	 to	 such
extravagant	 lengths?	 Was	 it	 simply	 to	 impress	 Humayun?	 Did	 it	 flatter	 his	 ego	 to	 have	 the	 Moghul
emperor	seeking	his	protection,	or	was	there	something	deeper?
Though	 Humayun	 shared	 his	 unease	 with	 Kasim	 and	 Zahid	 Beg,	 he	 knew	 he	 could	 not	 discuss	 it
with	Hamida.	Every	sign	of	the	shah’s	goodwill	seemed	to	revive	her	–	in	her	eyes	it	spelled	hope	that
Tahmasp	would	assist	Humayun	against	his	half-brothers	and	help	him	win	back	Akbar.	Of	course,	in
a	way	Hamida	was	right.	Whatever	the	shah’s	true	motives	–	and	just	possibly	they	might	be	entirely
benevolent	–	he	must	make	an	ally	of	him	.	.	.
At	last	on	an	early	summer ’s	day,	the	moment	Humayun	had	been	so	keenly	anticipating	arrived.	In
a	 meadow	 bright	 with	 flowers	 near	 Kazvin,	 Shah	 Tahmasp,	 accompanied	 by	 ten	 thousand	 of	 his
cavalrymen,	was	waiting	to	greet	the	Moghul	emperor.	As	Humayun	had	come	to	expect	of	the	shah,
every	last	detail	had	been	thought	of	–	the	exact	spot	where	Humayun	was	to	dismount,	where	his	men

were	to	wait,	the	path	of	thick,	dark-red	rugs	sprinkled	with	dried	rosebuds	leading	to	the	centre	of	the
meadow	where	a	vast,	circular,	golden	carpet	–	silken	threads	gleaming	in	the	sun	–	had	been	spread.
Standing	alone	in	the	very	centre	of	the	carpet,	his	troops	drawn	up	some	fifty	yards	behind,	was
the	 shah,	 dressed	 in	 crimson	 velvet	 and	 on	 his	 head	 a	 tall,	 pointed	 jewelled	 cap	 of	 crimson	 silk
embroidered	with	gold	thread.	Humayun	knew	what	the	hat	signified.	It	was	the	taj	–	the	symbol	of	the
Islamic	Shia	faith.	As	Humayun	approached	the	edge	of	the	carpet,	Tahmasp	stepped	towards	him	and
taking	 him	 by	 the	 shoulders	 smilingly	 embraced	 him.	 Then	 he	 led	 Humayun	 to	 a	 large	 bolster	 and
seating	Humayun	to	his	right,	sat	down	beside	him.
‘You	 are	 welcome,	 my	 brother.’	 Humayun	 saw	 that	 Tahmasp	 was	 about	 his	 own	 age,	 strongfeatured,	pale-skinned	and	with	luminous	black	eyes	beneath	thick	brows.
‘I	am	grateful	for	your	hospitality.	I	had	heard	of	the	glories	of	Persia	and	now	I	have	seen	them
for	myself.’
Tahmasp	 smiled.	 ‘What	 little	 I	 could	 provide	 while	 you	 were	 on	 the	 road	 was,	 I	 am	 sure,	 poor
compared	with	the	magnificence	of	the	Moghuls	of	which	I,	in	turn,	have	heard.’
Humayun	looked	sharply	at	his	host.	Tahmasp	knew	very	well	there	had	been	nothing	magnificent
about	his	flight	to	Persia.	Had	there	been	a	barb	in	those	flattering	words?	Conscious	of	the	thousands
of	watching	eyes	–	eyes	that	would	see	what	he	was	about	to	do	–	Humayun	made	a	sudden	decision.
He	must	show	them	that	he	had	not	come	to	Persia	a	beggar.	He	would	make	a	gesture	so	splendid	that
even	in	fabulous	Persia	it	would	be	spoken	of	down	the	ages	–	a	gesture	so	unmatchable	that	it	would
place	Persia’s	ruler	in	his	debt.
‘Shah	Tahmasp,	I	have	brought	you	a	gift	from	Hindustan.’	Reaching	inside	the	neck	of	his	robe,
Humayun	pulled	out	the	flowered	silk	pouch	in	which,	through	all	the	hard	and	hazardous	times,	he
had	kept	his	greatest	treasure	close	to	his	heart.	Slowly,	deliberately,	Humayun	extracted	the	Koh-iNur	 and	 raised	 it	 high	 in	 the	 air	 to	 catch	 the	 sunlight.	 It	 shone	 bright	 as	 a	 star	 and	 Humayun	 heard
Shah	Tahmasp	gasp.
‘Had	I	not	been	on	the	road	so	long,	I	might	have	found	something	yet	more	worthy	of	you.	But	I
hope	this	bauble	pleases	you.	It	is	named	the	Koh-i-Nur,	the	Mountain	of	Light.	May	its	light	shine	on
you,	Shah	Tahmasp,	and	on	our	enduring	friendship.’

Chapter	16
Kandahar
‘That	you	turned	to	me	in	your	distress	touched	my	heart.The	world	will	see	that	when	the	Moghul
emperor	sought	my	help,	I	answered	him.	I	will	give	you	an	army	and	one	of	my	best	generals	so	that
you	 may	 reclaim	 what	 has	 been	 taken	 from	 you.’	 Shah	 Tahmasp	 clasped	 Humayun	 by	 the	 shoulder.
‘As	our	fathers	were	once	allies,	so	we	will	be	.	.	.’	They	were	sitting	on	silk	cushions	on	a	marble
platform	constructed	over	the	intersection	of	two	water	channels	flowing	north	to	south	and	east	to
west	through	the	shah’s	private	gardens.The	four	quarters	of	the	garden	created	by	the	channels	were
planted	with	fruit	trees	–	quince,	cherry,	apple,	apricot,	peach	and	the	shah’s	favourite,	apple	trees	–
on	whose	branches	small	golden	fruit	were	already	forming.	Songbirds	with	jewelled	collars	hopped
among	the	branches.
When	Tahmasp	had	summoned	him	to	this	audience	in	what	the	shah	called	his	‘paradise	garden’,
Humayun	 had	 allowed	 himself	 to	 hope.	 But	 the	 shah’s	 offer	 went	 beyond	 anything	 he’d	 anticipated.
The	 sacrifice	 of	 the	 Koh-i-Nur	 had	 been	 worth	 it	 and	 he	 struggled	 to	 control	 his	 elation.	 ‘You	 are
gracious,’	he	replied.	‘With	your	men	fighting	beside	mine,	I	have	no	doubt	of	victory	.	.	.’
‘You	 may	 wonder	 why	 I	 am	 so	 ready	 to	 assist	 you.	 It	 is	 not	 just	 out	 of	 sentiment.	 I	 have	 many
reasons.	Treachery	within	royal	dynasties	such	as	ours	is	dangerous.	You	were	not	the	only	Moghul
to	write	to	me.Your	half-brother	Kamran	also	sent	me	a	message	–	that	you	were	fleeing	into	Persia,
that	 if	 I	 imprisoned	 you	 he	 would	 give	 me	 many	 things	 –	 gold,	 gemstones	 and	 even	 the	 city	 of
Kandahar.’	Tahmasp’s	black	eyes	glittered.	‘He	sought	to	bargain	with	me	as	if	I	were	a	merchant	in
the	 bazaar.	 His	 arrogance	 angered	 me.	 But	 more	 than	 that,	 I	 asked	 myself,	 how	 can	 I	 trust	 a	 prince
eager	to	shed	his	own	brother ’s	blood?	If	I	wished	I	could	squash	him	like	a	fly	but	I	prefer	to	help
you	do	so.’
He	leaned	forward.	‘I	have	little	interest	in	expanding	my	lands	eastwards.	What	I	want	is	stability
on	my	borders	as	there	was	in	your	father ’s	day.	While	Babur	–	may	his	soul	rest	in	Paradise	–	ruled,
he	 kept	 the	 tribes	 –	 the	 Pashais,	 Kafirs	 and	 others	 –	 in	 check.	 Persia’s	 merchants	 travelled	 safely
without	 let	 or	 hindrance	 all	 the	 way	 from	 Meshed,	 Isfahan	 and	 Shiraz	 to	 Kashgar	 beyond	 the
mountains	 of	 Ferghana.	 But	 since	 your	 half-brother	 seized	 Kabul	 there	 has	 been	 anarchy	 and	 my
people	are	suffering.	With	my	help	you	can	restore	order.’
As	 the	 shah	 was	 talking,	 Humayun	 recalled	 Darya’s	 account	 of	 how	 Kamran	 had	 used	 gold
plundered	 from	 Persian	 merchants	 to	 raise	 and	 fund	 the	 army	 with	 which	 he	 had	 taken	 Kabul	 and
wondered	whether	Tahmasp	knew	of	this.
‘Winter	comes	early	to	my	homelands,	and	gracious	as	is	your	hospitality	I	am	eager	to	begin	the
campaign	 as	 soon	 as	 possible.	 I	 would	 like	 to	 move	 first	 against	 Kandahar	 and	 then	 on	 to	 Kabul
before	the	first	snows.	When	do	you	think	your	troops	might	be	ready	to	accompany	me?’
‘I	began	assembling	a	force	weeks	before	you	reached	Kazvin.	I	can	give	you	ten	thousand	men,
including	 mounted	 archers,	 musketeers,	 and	 artillerymen	 as	 well	 as	 cavalry.	 They	 –	 and	 their
commander	Rustum	Beg	–	can	be	ready	with	their	cannon,	other	weapons	and	baggage	train	in	two

weeks’	time.	Do	the	ladies	of	your	family	wish	to	remain	here	in	Kazvin?	My	sister	will	take	great
care	of	them.’
Humayun	shook	his	head.‘Danger	and	hardship	are	nothing	to	them.They	will	want	to	go	with	me.
My	wife	is	tormented	by	anxiety	over	the	fate	of	our	son.	If	she	had	her	way	we	would	leave	today.’
‘Her	 feelings	 do	 her	 honour	 as	 a	 mother	 and	 as	 an	 empress.	 I’ve	 heard	 much	 of	 the	 courage	 of
Moghul	women.	My	father	held	your	aunt	Khanzada	Begam	in	high	esteem.’
‘She	had	reason	to	be	very	grateful	to	Shah	Ismail	.	.	.	’
Tahmasp	acknowledged	the	compliment	with	a	graceful	gesture	of	his	bejewelled	hand.	‘But	before
we	 speak	 further	 of	 going	 to	 war,	 there	 is	 something	 I	 must	 ask	 you.	 You	 are	 a	 true	 believer	 but	 it
grieves	me	that	you	follow	the	Sunni	path	and	not	that	of	the	Shias,	like	myself.	Show	me	that	you	are
indeed	my	brother,	that	the	bonds	between	us	are	as	strong	as	those	of	blood.	Embrace	the	Shia	sect	so
that	you	and	I	can	worship	side	by	side	to	ask	God’s	blessing	for	our	enterprise.’Tahmasp’s	dark	eyes,
fixed	on	Humayun’s	face,	were	fervent	and	glowing.
Humayun	 struggled	 to	 contain	 his	 surprise	 and	 dismay.	 Tahmasp	 had	 chosen	 his	 moment	 well	 –
offering	Humayun	everything	he	could	wish	for	before	making	his	demand.	It	was	easier	to	deal	with
a	man	hungry	for	the	material	things	of	life	–	lands	and	gold,	Humayun	reflected.	Such	a	man	was
usually	prepared	to	compromise.	A	man	hungry	for	another ’s	soul	was	not.	He	must	be	very	careful
how	he	handled	Tahmasp.
‘You	seek	this	only	of	me,	not	of	my	commanders	and	my	men?’	he	asked	after	a	moment.
‘Only	of	you,	but	of	course	where	an	emperor	leads,	others	often	wish	to	follow.’
‘I	must	think	over	what	you	have	said.’
‘Do	not	take	too	long,	my	brother.	As	you	yourself	said,	you	wish	to	campaign	before	the	winter
snows	become	an	extra	enemy	.	.	.	’	Shah	Tahmasp	rose	from	the	silk	cushions	and	summoning	his
guards,	who	had	been	waiting	at	a	discreet	distance	while	the	two	rulers	talked,	stepped	down	from	the
platform	 and	 walked	 away	 through	 the	 garden,	 pausing	 to	 examine	 the	 crimson	 blooms	 on	 a	 rose
bush.
Humayun	went	straight	to	Hamida.	As	he	entered	her	apartments,	her	hopeful,	expectant	expression
made	him	feel	his	predicament	even	more	keenly.
‘What	did	he	say?	Will	he	help	us?’	she	asked,	as	soon	as	they	were	alone.
‘The	shah	is	no	friend	to	Kamran	and	will	give	me	an	army	to	defeat	him,	but	there	is	a	price	.	.	.	’
‘What	price?	He	has	the	Koh-i-Nur.	What	more	do	we	have	to	give?’
‘He	wants	me	to	become	a	Shia	Muslim	.	.	.	’
‘Is	that	all?’	Hamida	came	closer	and	took	his	face	between	her	hands.
‘It’s	a	great	deal.	Shah	Ismail	tried	to	force	my	father	Babur	to	become	a	Shia	–	it	nearly	cost	him
his	 life	 and	 it	 certainly	 cost	 him	 Samarkand.	 Our	 people	 hated	 him	 for	 it	 –	 they	 turned	 to	 Shaibani
Khan,	 preferring	 to	 be	 ruled	 by	 a	 murderous	 Sunni	 Uzbek	 than	 a	 Timurid	 prince	 they	 suspected	 of
converting	to	Shiism	.	.	.	’
Hamida	released	him	and	stared	up	at	him	incredulously.	‘But	those	were	different	times.	We’re	not
in	 Samarkand	 now.	 Most	 important,	 we	 have	 lost	 our	 son.	 We	 must	 do	 everything	 in	 our	 power	 to
save	 him	 .	 .	 .	 it	 is	 our	 duty	 .	 .	 .	 our	 sacred	 duty	 above	 anything	 else.You	 must	 accept	 this,	 just	 as	 I
accepted	your	arguments	not	to	pursue	Kamran	when	he	took	Akbar.’
‘But	 this	 explains	 why	 Shah	 Tahmasp	 was	 so	 welcoming	 .	 .	 .	 this	 is	 what	 he	 really	 wants	 .	 .	 .	 to
convert	the	Moghuls	to	Shiism.	I	saw	it	in	his	face	as	he	spoke	to	me	.	.	.	’
‘Are	 you	 sure	 he	 doesn’t	 just	 want	 you	 to	 convert	 as	 some	 kind	 of	 token	 recognition	 of	 his
authority?’

‘I	don’t	think	even	his	mind	is	subtle	enough	for	that.	And	don’t	you	see?	That	would	be	even	more
repugnant.	You	don’t	understand	how	it	would	affect	my	troops.’
‘No,	you	are	the	one	who	doesn’t	understand.	Swallow	your	pride,	if	not	for	my	sake	then	for	our
son’s!’
‘My	pride	is	one	of	the	few	things	left	to	me	and	you	ask	me	to	sacrifice	it?’
‘You	have	no	choice.	Our	situation	is	too	perilous	to	be	over-scrupulous.	Go	through	the	outward
ceremonies.	 Think	 what	 you	 will	 in	 your	 heart.True	 pride	 is	 internal,	 not	 external.	 Remember	 how
much	 outward	 pride	 it	 must	 have	 cost	 your	 father	 to	 surrender	 Khanzada	 to	 Shaibani	 Khan,	 but	 he
kept	his	inner	spirit	strong.’
Humayun	 said	 nothing	 and	 Hamida	 continued	 more	 softly,	 ‘In	 any	 case,	 don’t	 Shias	 and	 Sunnis
worship	 the	 same	 God?	 Their	 divisions	 are	 of	 human	 not	 divine	 manufacture.	 They	 stem	 from
quarrels	in	the	Prophet’s	family,	just	like	those	that	have	split	your	own	.	.	.	’
Humayun	bowed	his	head.	She	was	right,	he	didn’t	have	a	choice	if	he	wanted	to	regain	his	throne
and	recover	his	son.	His	decision	was	made.	Whatever	his	commanders	and	their	men	might	think,	at
least	temporarily	he	must	don	the	crimson	silk	taj	of	the	Shia	monarch	and	kneel	at	Shah	Tahmasp’s
side	in	the	mosque	to	call	down	God’s	blessing	on	his	campaign.	Sunni	or	Shia,	his	cause	was	just	and
God	–	the	one	God	–	would	still	be	on	his	side	.	.	.

They	 were	 making	 good	 progress,	 Humayun	 thought	 with	 satisfaction	 –	 much	 swifter	 than	 on	 the
journey	to	Kazvin	that	had	been	at	the	stately	pace	dictated	by	the	shah.	Ahead	of	Humayun	rode	the
Persian	archers	and	musketeers	and	directly	behind	him	were	Hamida	and	Gulbadan	and	their	women
in	their	wagons,	surrounded	by	his	bodyguard.	Next	came	the	rest	of	his	soldiers,	then	the	baggage
train	 including	 the	 cannon	 loaded	 on	 bullock	 carts	 and	 finally	 the	 Persian	 cavalry,	 the	 tips	 of	 their
spears	–	broader-bladed	than	Moghul	ones	but	no	less	sharp	–	catching	the	early	morning	sun.
Zahid	 Beg	 was	 to	 Humayun’s	 left	 but	 at	 his	 right	 shoulder	 was	 Rustum	 Beg,	 the	 Persian
commander.	He	was	a	thin-faced,	delicate-boned	elderly	man,	a	cousin	of	the	shah’s,	fond	of	quoting
from	the	Persian	poets	to	Humayun’s	war	council	but	content	to	leave	the	day-to-day	command	of	his
force	to	his	deputy,	Bairam	Khan.	The	latter	was	still	quite	young	–	no	more	than	about	thirty-four	or
five	–	but	his	thick-set	build	and	the	scar	at	the	right	corner	of	his	mouth	made	him	look	older.	His
eyes	 were	 an	 unusual	 colour	 for	 a	 Persian	 –	 deep,	 almost	 indigo	 blue	 –	 and	 his	 long	 dark	 hair
protruded	in	a	plait	from	beneath	a	pointed	steel	helmet	hung	with	chain	mail	to	protect	the	neck	and
the	sides	of	the	face	and	surmounted	by	a	peacock	feather.
In	 the	 first	 days	 after	 leaving	 Kazvin,	 Bairam	 Khan	 had	 spoken	 little,	 beyond	 responding	 to
Humayun’s	questions.	However,	as	the	weeks	passed	he	had	become	more	expansive.	Everything	he
said	was	well	considered	and	he	listened	to	Humayun’s	commanders	with	courtesy	and	tact.	That	was
good.	 Had	 Rustum	 Beg	 pushed	 himself	 forward	 more	 and	 had	 Bairam	 Khan	 been	 over-haughty,	 it
might	 have	 caused	 dissension	 between	 Humayun’s	 men	 and	 the	 far	 more	 numerous	 Persians.	 As	 it
was,	 they	 co-existed	 well.	 Humayun	 was	 also	 relieved	 that	 his	 men	 seemed	 to	 have	 accepted	 his
conversion	 to	 Shiism	 as	 the	 pragmatic	 decision	 it	 was.	 They	 had	 watched	 the	 public	 ceremony	 at
which	the	shah	himself	had	placed	the	scarlet	taj	on	his	head	without	protest,	understanding,	as	he	did,
that	it	was	necessary	to	secure	the	future	of	them	all.

Humayun	looked	up	to	see	a	small	group	of	horsemen	galloping	towards	him,	dust	dancing	in	the
air	around	them.	It	was	Ahmed	Khan	with	two	of	his	scouts	and	two	Persian	cavalrymen	Rustum	Beg
had	sent	as	guides.
‘Majesty,	the	Helmand	river	lies	only	fifteen	miles	away.’
‘Excellent.’	 Humayun	 smiled.	 In	 two	 days	 –	 perhaps	 even	 tomorrow	 –	 he	 would	 again	 cross	 the
cold	waters	of	the	Helmand	and	this	time	he	would	cross	it	with	a	great	army	at	his	back.

The	 fortress	 of	 Kandahar	 with	 its	 thick	 stone	 walls	 and	 slit-windowed	 towers	 looked	 grimly
impregnable	against	a	backdrop	of	jagged,	purple-brown	mountains.	Though	it	was	only	September,
the	chill	wind	made	Humayun	and	his	commanders	shiver	as	they	looked	towards	the	fortress	from
their	vantage	point	on	the	downward	slope	of	a	wooded	hill	about	half	a	mile	away.
Where	in	that	fortress	was	Akbar?	Humayun	knew	that	his	son’s	fate	depended	on	the	decisions	he
was	 about	 to	 take.	 Kamran	 was	 no	 fool.	 His	 spies	 would	 have	 been	 observing	 Humayun’s	 progress
and	he	must	know	that	Humayun	–	backed	as	he	was	by	crack	Persian	troops	–	had	the	stronger	hand.
Eventually,	whether	by	siege	or	assault,	Kandahar	would	fall.	So	what	would	Kamran	do?	Threaten	to
harm	Akbar	if	Humayun	did	not	withdraw?	Kamran	was	capable	of	it.	On	the	other	hand,	Humayun
tried	to	comfort	himself,	his	half-brother	would	know	that	if	he	killed	Akbar	he	would	lose	his	best
bargaining	counter	.	.	.
Bairam	Khan	and	Zahid	Beg	were	staring	at	the	fortress	and	discussing	its	strengths	and	potential
weak	 spots.	 Nadim	 Khwaja	 too	 was	 gazing	 at	 it	 intently.	 As	 a	 chieftain	 from	 the	 mountains	 above
Kandahar	the	fortress	would	be	a	familiar	sight	to	him	but	his	thoughts,	like	Humayun’s,	would	be	for
his	family.	His	wife	Maham	Anga	and	their	own	son	Adham	Khan	were,	like	Akbar,	prisoners	within
those	 walls.	 Briefly,	 Humayun	 put	 his	 hand	 on	 Nadim	 Khwaja’s	 shoulder,	 and	 as	 their	 eyes	 met	 he
knew	that	they	shared	the	same	inner	emotions.	They	were	both	warriors	whose	natural	instinct	was	to
storm	into	the	fortress	and	rescue	their	loved	ones.	But	understandable	as	such	hot-blooded	impulses
were,	they	were	not	the	way	.	.	.
An	idea	was	beginning	to	form	in	Humayun’s	mind.	He	must	find	a	means	of	opening	a	dialogue
with	 Kamran.	 Repugnant	 though	 he	 found	 the	 idea	 of	 negotiation,	 he	 knew	 it	 was	 what	 his	 father
would	 have	 done.	 Hadn’t	 Babur	 swallowed	 his	 pride	 and	 negotiated	 with	 Shaibani	 Khan	 to	 save	 the
dynasty?	It	was	also	what	Khanzada	would	have	counselled.	She	above	everyone	had	understood	the
value	of	patience,	of	making	short-term	sacrifices	in	order	to	win	the	ultimate	prize.
But	who	could	speak	on	his	behalf?	He	couldn’t	do	it	himself.	Even	if	Kamran	agreed	to	see	him,	if
they	came	face	to	face	there	would	be	blows,	not	words,	such	was	their	mutual	hatred.	Yet	he	could
not	 send	 Kasim	 or	 one	 of	 his	 commanders.This	 was	 a	 family	 matter.	 Kamran	 must	 be	 made	 to
understand	how	he	had	violated	every	principle	of	honour	and	loyalty	in	the	Moghul	code,	how	his
ambition	had	split	and	weakened	Babur ’s	legacy.
There	was	only	one	person	travelling	with	Humayun	who	could	speak	to	Kamran	of	such	things,
who	 shared	 both	 his	 blood	 and	 Akbar ’s	 blood.	 Gulbadan.	 Moghul	 women	 often	 played	 the	 role	 of
peacemakers	between	the	clans	and	her	sharp	intelligence	was	the	equal	of	any	of	his	counsellors’.
Dishonourable	as	he	had	shown	himself,	not	even	Kamran	would	harm	his	half-sister	and	he	might
even	listen	–	if	not	to	her	personal	pleas	at	least	to	the	offer	she	would	carry	to	him	from	Humayun.	If

Kamran	 would	 return	 Akbar	 unharmed,	 he	 could	 depart	 freely	 with	 Askari	 and	 their	 men	 and	 their
weapons	and	Humayun’s	solemn	vow	–	in	the	name	of	their	father	Babur	–	not	to	pursue	them.
Only	 one	 question	 remained.	 Would	 Gulbadan	 be	 willing	 to	 undertake	 such	 a	 mission?	 But	 as
Humayun	signalled	to	his	commanders	to	turn	their	horses	back	up	the	hill	to	rejoin	their	forces,	he
was	confident	he	knew	the	answer.

‘Majesty,	Gulbadan	Begam	is	returning.’
Hearing	 the	 shout	 from	 outside	 his	 command	 tent,	 Humayun	 leaped	 up	 from	 the	 stool	 on	 which
he’d	 been	 sitting	 and,	 pushing	 aside	 the	 tent	 flaps,	 ducked	 out	 into	 the	 swiftly	 falling	 dusk.	 On	 the
floor	of	the	valley	that	lay	between	Humayun’s	camp	and	the	fortress,	a	line	of	flickering	lights	was
drawing	slowly	nearer	–	torches	borne	by	the	detachment	of	guards	he	had	sent	with	Jauhar	to	escort
Gulbadan,	who	were	riding	before	and	behind	the	wagon	in	which	she	was	travelling.
It	was	seven	hours	since	she	had	set	out	under	a	flag	of	truce.	Straining	his	eyes	into	the	darkness,
Humayun	 allowed	 himself	 to	 hope	 for	 just	 a	 moment	 that	 Akbar	 might	 be	 in	 Gulbadan’s	 arms	 but
common	 sense	 quickly	 overcame	 such	 wishful	 thinking.	 Kamran	 was	 not	 a	 man	 to	 be	 moved	 by
sentiment.	 He	 would	 not	 release	 Akbar	 until	 the	 very	 last	 moment,	 when	 he	 was	 certain	 Humayun
would	keep	his	word.
Nevertheless,	unable	to	contain	his	impatience,	Humayun	ran	to	the	roped-off	enclosure	where	his
horse	was	tethered.	Without	waiting	for	a	saddle	and	using	the	halter	in	place	of	reins,	he	urged	it	to
leap	the	rope	and	galloped	off	down	to	the	valley.	His	heart	was	jumping	so	fast	that	for	a	moment	he
imagined	the	thudding	of	hooves	on	the	soft	turf	was	the	sound	it	was	making.	For	so	much	of	the
time	he	had	to	suppress	his	feelings	–	to	show	himself	a	cool,	dispassionate	leader	to	his	men,	to	turn
a	calm,	confident	face	to	Hamida.	But	out	here	in	the	enshrouding	darkness	he	could	admit	that	he	was
as	vulnerable	as	any	man	to	fears	and	anxieties,	particularly	over	the	fate	of	those	he	loved	and	whom
it	was	his	duty	to	protect.
‘It	is	the	emperor!’	he	heard	Jauhar	cry	out.	Swerving	to	a	standstill	just	a	few	yards	from	where
Gulbadan’s	wagon	had	halted,	Humayun	slid	from	his	horse.	Jauhar	had	also	dismounted	and	without
words	led	Humayun	to	Gulbadan’s	cart.	Taking	the	torch	Jauhar	was	holding,	Humayun	drew	aside
the	curtains	and	peered	in	at	his	half-sister.
‘I	am	glad	to	see	you	safely	returned.	What	did	Kamran	say?	Will	he	accept	my	terms?’
Gulbadan	 leaned	 further	 forward	 into	 the	 light,	 her	 young	 face	 very	 tired.	 ‘Humayun,	 I’m	 sorry.
Kamran	wasn’t	there	–	only	Askari.	Hearing	of	your	advance,	some	weeks	ago	Kamran	rode	to	Kabul
which	he	means	to	defend	against	you.’
‘And	Akbar?’
‘Kamran	took	him	with	him	to	Kabul.	But	Humayun	–	there	is	still	hope.	Askari	assured	me	Akbar
is	in	good	health	and	that	Maham	Anga	is	with	him	.	.	.	’
‘How	can	I	trust	a	word	Askari	says	when	he	follows	a	man	prepared	to	use	a	child	as	a	weapon
against	me?’
‘Askari	 does	 feel	 the	 shame	 of	 it,	 I	 think.	 Also,	 from	 what	 he	 says	 I	 believe	 he	 thinks	 that,	 by
ordering	him	to	remain	behind	in	Kandahar,	Kamran	has	left	him	to	bear	the	brunt	of	your	anger.’
‘Will	Askari	surrender	Kandahar	to	me?’

‘He	will	–	on	the	promise	that	you	will	spare	his	life	and	those	of	his	men.’
Humayun	smiled	grimly.	‘He	can	keep	his	miserable	life	and	so	may	his	men,	but	my	offer	of	free
passage	was	conditional	on	the	safe	return	of	Akbar.	Askari,	at	least,	will	stay	in	my	custody	until	I
have	found	my	son	and	dealt	with	Kamran.What	of	Hindal?	Did	you	learn	anything	of	his	fate?’
‘My	brother	is	often	in	my	thoughts	and	I	pressed	Askari	about	what	had	happened	to	him	.	.	.	He
told	me	that	Kamran	ordered	Hindal	to	be	taken	to	the	fort	at	Jalalabad	and	held	prisoner	there.	But
somehow	 on	 the	 way	 there	 he	 managed	 to	 escape.	 That	 was	 many	 months	 ago	 and	 Askari	 does	 not
know	where	he	has	gone	.	.	.	I	hope	my	brother	is	safe.’
‘So	do	I.Though	we	had	our	differences	I	was	not	blameless	and	he	was	more	of	a	brother	to	me
than	either	of	the	others.	But	you,	Gulbadan,	you	are	a	true	sister	to	me	and	a	true	friend	to	Hamida.
What	you	did	today	was	hard	and	I’m	grateful.’
It	was	a	bitter	thing	that	Babur ’s	sons	should	be	so	divided.	Humayun	was	locked	in	gloom	as	he
walked	 slowly	 back	 to	 his	 horse.	 Arriving	 back	 at	 the	 camp,	 he	 went	 straight	 to	 Hamida.	 She	 was
waiting	inside	the	women’s	tent	and	at	his	sombre	look	the	light	of	hope	in	her	dark	eyes	faded.	‘So
Kamran	has	refused	your	offer.’
‘Not	even	that.	He	wasn’t	there.	Hamida	–	he	has	taken	Akbar	to	Kabul	.	.	.	’
As	tears	welled	in	her	eyes,	Humayun	caught	her	to	him.	‘Listen	to	me.	We	mustn’t	despair.	Askari
is	 still	 in	 Kandahar	 and	 he	 promised	 Gulbadan	 that	 Akbar	 is	 in	 good	 health.	 That	 at	 least	 is	 good
news.’
‘But	Kabul	is	so	far	away	.	.	.	’
‘It’s	three	hundred	miles	away	and	I’d	go	three	thousand	miles	to	recover	our	son.	You	know	that	.	.
.	’
‘I	 do,	 but	 it’s	 so	 hard.	 I	 think	 constantly	 about	 Akbar	 and	 what	 might	 be	 happening	 to	 him,	 even
when	I	try	to	sleep.	When	I	was	pregnant	and	we	were	fleeing	Maldeo,	I	couldn’t	help	imagining	how
it	would	feel	to	have	him	cut	living	from	my	womb.	I	felt	the	cold	blade	in	my	flesh.	This	worry	is	as
bad	.	.	.	it’s	like	a	physical	pain.	I’m	not	sure	how	much	more	of	it	I	can	bear.’
‘Be	strong	for	a	little	longer	.	.	.	be	strong	for	our	son,	just	as	you	were	when	Maldeo	plotted	our
destruction.Askari	has	offered	to	surrender	Kandahar	to	me.	As	soon	as	I	have	secured	it,	we	ride	for
Kabul.’	He	felt	her	body	relax	a	little	and	she	stepped	back	from	him.
‘You’re	right	–	disappointment	made	me	speak	as	I	did.	I	had	convinced	myself	I	would	get	Akbar
back	within	a	day	or	two.	It	was	foolish	to	build	up	my	hopes.’
‘It	 was	 only	 natural.	 I’d	 let	 myself	 hope	 too.	 I	 also	 must	 learn	 patience	 and	 persistence.	 Taking
strength	from	each	other	we	will	endure	and	succeed.’
A	 few	 minutes	 later,	 Humayun	 entered	 his	 command	 tent,	 sat	 down,	 took	 a	 piece	 of	 paper	 and
scratched	a	few	sentences	on	it.	Then,	though	it	was	growing	late,	he	summoned	his	war	council.
‘Ahmed	Khan,	I	want	you	to	send	a	detachment	of	your	men	to	Kandahar	tonight	taking	this	letter	to
my	half-brother	Askari.	My	message	to	him	is	simple.	“Tomorrow	I	will	ride	at	the	head	of	my	forces
to	your	gates.	If	you	open	them	to	me,	as	you	promised	our	sister,	you	will	keep	your	life	though	you
will	be	my	prisoner.	If	you	attempt	in	any	way	to	deceive	me,	your	life	–	and	the	lives	of	your	men	–
are	forfeit.	The	choice	is	yours.”’
As	Ahmed	Khan	hurried	off,	Humayun	addressed	the	rest	of	his	commanders.
‘Tomorrow,	if	my	half-brother	keeps	his	word,	we	will	occupy	Kandahar.	Bairam	Khan,	I	ask	you
to	select	two	thousand	of	your	men	under	the	leadership	of	your	most	trustworthy	senior	officers	to
garrison	the	fortress.’
Bairam	 Khan	 nodded.‘I	 will	 choose	 from	 among	 my	 archers	 and	 musketeers	 and,	 if	 you	 agree,

Majesty,	I	will	also	detail	a	detachment	of	cavalry	to	remain	to	patrol	the	surrounding	country.’
‘An	excellent	suggestion,	Bairam	Khan.	Once	our	garrison	is	in	place	in	Kandahar,	we	set	out	for
Kabul.	Though	it	is	a	long	journey	through	difficult	mountain	terrain,	we	must	travel	hard	and	fast.
Every	day	that	passes	gives	my	half-brother	more	time	to	buy	allies	and	strengthen	his	position	there.’
‘What	about	our	baggage	train?	That	will	slow	us,’	asked	Zahid	Beg.
‘We	 will	 carry	 what	 we	 can	 with	 us	 and	 designate	 a	 small	 force	 to	 protect	 the	 baggage	 train,
including	our	cannon,	which	must	follow	at	the	best	pace	it	can.	But	the	hour	grows	late.	We	will	meet
again	an	hour	before	dawn	to	prepare	for	our	advance	on	Kabul.’

The	 long	 valley,	 framed	 to	 north	 and	 south	 by	 sweeping	 grey	 mountains,	 was	 filled	 with	 tents
radiating	out	in	lines	from	the	centre	where	Humayun’s	scarlet	command	tent	stood.	To	its	right	were
the	tents	of	his	senior	officers,	a	bright	scarlet	banner	streaming	from	the	roof	of	Bairam	Khan’s.	To
the	left,	enclosed	by	wooden	screens	fastened	together	by	leather	thongs,	were	the	haram	tents	where
the	 women	 had	 their	 private	 accommodation.	 Hamida	 and	 Gulbadan	 had	 insisted	 on	 travelling	 with
Humayun	 rather	 than	 with	 the	 slower	 baggage	 column	 and	 neither	 had	 murmured	 a	 word	 of
complaint	about	the	forced	marches	of	fourteen	hours	a	day.
But	despite	their	efforts	Kabul	still	lay	nearly	a	hundred	and	fifty	miles	away	to	the	northeast	and
there	was	little	Humayun	could	do	to	increase	their	pace.	All	the	time	it	was	growing	colder.	Though
it	was	only	early	October,	the	gusting	winds	already	carried	a	few	flakes	of	snow.	Before	too	long	it
would	be	full	winter.
At	least	as	he	advanced	his	army	was	swelling	with	new	recruits.	Ahmed	Khan	had	just	told	him	that
another	 group	 of	 deserters	 from	 Kamran	 had	 ridden	 into	 the	 camp	 offering	 him	 their	 allegiance.
Humayun	had	ordered	the	leader	to	be	brought	to	him	for	questioning.
Half	 an	 hour	 later,	 Humayun	 looked	 down	 at	 the	 man	 lying	 at	 his	 feet,	 arms	 outstretched,	 in	 the
formal	obeisance	of	the	korunush.	 From	 his	 black	 boots	 embroidered	 with	 red	 stars,	 an	 emblem	 of
their	 clan,	 Humayun	 guessed	 he	 was	 a	 chieftain	 of	 the	 Kafirs	 who	 dwelled	 in	 the	 kotals,	 the	 high,
narrow	passes	around	Kabul.	The	Kafirs	were	notorious	turncoats.	When	Humayun	was	just	a	boy,	his
father	had	made	an	example	of	the	men	of	one	Kafir	village	who	had	murdered	his	envoys	by	having
them	impaled	before	the	walls	of	Kabul	so	that	the	earth	had	been	stained	red	with	their	blood.
‘Get	up.	You	are	a	Kafir,	are	you	not?’
‘Yes,	Majesty.’	The	man,	weather-beaten,	squat	and	bandy-legged,	looked	gaunt	and	his	sheepskin
jerkin	was	torn.
‘Why	have	you	and	your	men	come	here?’
‘To	offer	to	serve	you,	Majesty.’
‘But	you	served	my	half-brother	Kamran,	didn’t	you?’
The	Kafir	nodded.
‘Why	did	you	desert	him?’
‘He	 broke	 his	 word.	 He	 promised	 us	 gold	 but	 he	 gave	 us	 nothing.	 When	 two	 of	 my	 men
complained	he	had	them	flung	from	the	walls	of	the	citadel	of	Kabul.’
‘When	was	this?’
‘Three	weeks	ago.	A	few	days	later,	when	your	brother	sent	us	foraging	into	the	mountains,	we	did

not	return	but	came	in	search	of	your	army.’
‘What	was	happening	in	Kabul	before	you	left?’
‘Your	brother	was	fortifying	the	citadel	and	laying	in	supplies	ready	for	a	siege	–	that	was	why	he
sent	parties	like	ours	out	foraging.	He	fears	you,	Majesty.	He	knows,	as	does	the	whole	of	Kabul,	that
you	are	advancing	with	a	great	army	.	.	.	that	you	have	Persian	troops	under	your	command	and	that	in
the	eyes	of	the	world	you,	not	he,	is	padishah	.	.	.	’
Humayun	ignored	the	man’s	ingratiating	smile.	‘Do	you	know	anything	about	my	infant	son?	Did
you	see	him	in	Kabul?’
The	man	looked	blank.	‘No,	Majesty.	I	did	not	even	know	he	was	there	.	.	.	’
‘You	are	sure	–	you	heard	nothing	of	a	royal	child	brought	with	his	wet-nurse	from	Kandahar?’
‘No,	Majesty,	nothing.’
Humayun	studied	the	Kafir	chieftain	for	a	few	moments.	The	man	had	no	allegiance	to	anyone	or
anything.	 All	 he	 cared	 about	 was	 who	 had	 the	 fattest	 purse.	 And	 he	 had	 been	 in	 Kamran’s	 service.
Humayun’s	instinct	was	to	have	him	and	his	men	ejected	from	the	camp.	But	that	would	send	out	a	bad
message	to	other	clans	thinking	of	joining	him.	The	struggle	ahead	would	be	long	and	hard	and	he
would	 need	 every	 soldier	 he	 could	 get.	 His	 own	 father	 had	 made	 good	 use	 of	 the	 wild	 mountain
tribes’	ferocious	fighting	skills,	though	he	had	kept	a	tight	rein	on	them.
‘You	and	your	men	may	join	my	army,	but	understand	this.	Any	disobedience,	any	disloyalty	will
be	punished	by	death.	If	you	serve	me	well,	once	Kabul	has	fallen	you	will	be	generously	rewarded.
Do	you	accept?’
‘Yes,	Majesty.’
Humayun	turned	to	his	guards.	‘Take	this	man	to	Zahid	Beg	so	he	can	decide	what	use	to	make	of
him	and	his	companions.’
As	 the	 setting	 sun	 cast	 purple	 shadows	 over	 the	 valley	 and	 dusk	 came	 tumbling	 down,	 Humayun
once	more	felt	the	need	for	solitude,	the	need	to	escape	if	only	for	a	little	while	from	the	burden	of
his	responsibilities.	Dismissing	his	guards	and	wrapping	his	cloak	around	him,	he	set	off	northwards
through	 the	 lines	 of	 tents,	 intending	 to	 walk	 the	 perimeter	 of	 the	 encampment.	 Instead,	 when	 he
reached	 the	 edge	 of	 the	 camp	 he	 continued	 beyond	 it,	 past	 the	 pickets,	 drawn	 by	 the	 outlines	 of	 the
mountains	beyond	as	they	folded	away	into	the	greater	darkness.
For	a	while,	he	followed	a	goat	track	as	it	climbed	steeply	upwards.	Below	him	he	could	see	the
orange	lights	of	a	hundred	camp	fires	as	his	men	cooked	their	evening	meal.	In	a	few	minutes	he	must
return	to	eat	with	Hamida	and	Gulbadan	in	the	haram	tent,	but	there	was	something	compelling	about
the	absolute	stillness	out	on	the	mountainside.	Glancing	up,	Humayun	looked	at	the	stars.	Low	on	the
horizon	was	Canopus	–	that	brightest,	most	auspicious	of	stars	that	his	father	had	seen	on	his	way	to
Kabul	and	that	had	given	him	such	hope.	Now	he	hoped	it	was	shining	for	him	too.

Chapter	17
Flesh	and	Blood
Winter	 descended	 quickly	 in	 the	 mountains.Three	 weeks	 ago,	 the	 fluttering	 snowflakes	 had	 barely
settled	but	now	the	wind	was	driving	them	almost	horizontally	down	a	narrow	defile	through	the	icy
mountains	 to	 the	 northwest	 of	 Kabul	 as	 Humayun	 led	 his	 army	 onwards.	 With	 the	 worsening
conditions	compounding	the	difficulties	of	travelling	over	the	many	passes,	Humayun	had	thought	it
wise	to	wait	for	his	main	baggage	train	to	catch	up.	Though	it	had	cost	him	some	days,	he	had	not
dared	 risk	 being	 separated	 from	 his	 cannon	 and	 other	 heavy	 equipment	 for	 a	 long	 period	 by	 the
winter	weather.
Ice	crystals	stung	Humayun’s	face	as	he	raised	his	head	to	scan	the	twisting	track	ahead.	Even	with
eyes	scrunched	to	slits	against	the	blizzard’s	frozen	bite,	he	could	see	almost	nothing,	certainly	not	the
tips	of	the	jagged	snow-covered	peaks	nor	the	summit	of	the	pass	of	which	the	defile	formed	a	part
and	which	he	guessed	could	be	no	more	than	three-quarters	of	a	mile	in	front	of	them.
Ahmed	Khan	should	soon	return.	He	had	sent	him	ahead	with	some	of	his	men	to	confirm	that	the
pass	could	be	negotiated	by	an	army	such	as	his	in	weather	as	severe	as	this	and	also	to	identify	a	spot
–	probably	on	the	downward	slope	–	where	they	could	camp	protected	from	the	wind.
Suddenly,	 despite	 the	 howling	 of	 the	 blizzard	 and	 the	 muffling	 effect	 of	 the	 red	 woollen	 cloth
wound	round	the	lower	part	of	his	face,	Humayun	thought	he	heard	a	cry	from	out	of	the	snow	ahead.
Perhaps	it	was	just	a	trick	of	the	wind,	or	even	a	wolf,	he	thought,	as	he	looked	up	again	and	pulled
his	face	cloth	down	to	hear	better.	As	he	did	so,	he	heard	another	cry	nearer	and	definitely	human	–
‘The	enemy	are	ahead!’
Then	he	saw	a	shadowy	rider	appear	through	the	whirling	snow,	galloping	down	the	snowy	track
towards	him,	oblivious	of	the	risks	of	the	rocks	and	the	ice.	As	the	horseman	drew	closer,	Humayun
saw	 that	 it	 was	 Ahmed	 Khan,	 frantically	 kicking	 and	 urging	 his	 horse	 on	 while	 repeatedly	 yelling,
‘The	enemy	are	ahead!	The	enemy	are	ahead!’	Two	of	his	scouts	were	close	behind	him.	Suddenly,
one	pitched	forward	over	his	horse’s	head,	two	arrows	protruding	from	his	back	as	he	rolled	over
and	 over	 in	 the	 white	 snow,	 staining	 it	 crimson	 with	 his	 blood.	 Moments	 later,	 the	 second	 scout’s
chestnut	horse	stumbled	and	collapsed	with	several	arrows	in	its	rump.	The	rider	slid	from	the	saddle
and	stumbled	on	through	the	deep	snow,	only	to	fall	himself	within	ten	yards,	transfixed	by	a	blackfeathered	arrow.
Then	Humayun	saw	emerging	through	the	snow	the	dark	shapes	of	unknown	horsemen	charging
towards	him,	some	crouching	low	over	their	horses’	necks,	swords	and	lances	extended	in	front	of
them,	and	others	with	bows	in	their	hands.	Humayun	yelled	to	Bairam	Khan	through	the	wind,	‘Have
the	wagons	drawn	into	the	best	defensive	position	you	can	–	put	those	carrying	the	women	right	in	the
centre.	Leave	sufficient	good	men	to	guard	them	properly	then	follow	me	with	the	rest.’
Humayun	kicked	his	horse	forward	to	face	the	threat	and	as	he	did	so	shouted	as	loudly	as	he	could
to	 a	 company	 of	 mounted	 archers	 riding	 just	 behind	 him,	 ‘Fire!’	 The	 men,	 who	 already	 had	 their
double	bows	unslung	and	the	strings	tightened	in	case	of	just	such	an	ambush,	stood	in	their	stirrups

and	 loosed	 a	 volley	 of	 arrows	 through	 the	 driving	 snow	 towards	 Kamran’s	 men.	 Several	 horses
staggered	and	fell,	throwing	their	riders.	One	lost	his	domed	helmet	in	his	fall	and	hit	his	shaven	head
hard	against	a	rock	protruding	through	the	snow,	smashing	his	skull	and	spattering	the	ground	with
blood	and	brains.
However,	the	rest	of	Kamran’s	cavalrymen	came	on,	the	downward	slope	of	the	defile	giving	added
impetus	to	their	charge	as	they	crashed	into	Humayun’s	front	line	of	horsemen,	who	opened	gaps	in
their	ranks	to	receive	them	before	trying	to	surround	them.	One	of	Kamran’s	men,	wearing	a	bulky
sheepskin	jacket	and	whirling	a	spiked	flail	around	his	head,	made	for	Humayun.	Senses	heightened
by	the	prospect	of	action,	Humayun	noticed	as	he	pulled	his	own	horse’s	head	round	how	the	mane	of
his	opponent’s	mount	was	encrusted	with	icicles.	The	spiked	balls	at	the	end	of	the	man’s	flail	swung
harmlessly	 past	 Humayun	 as	 he	 thrust	 at	 his	 enemy,	 but	 his	 sword	 swipe	 did	 no	 more	 than	 make	 a
deep	slash	in	the	man’s	thick	sheepskin	jacket.
Both	men	turned	and	rode	at	each	other	again,	their	horses’	hot	breath	steaming	in	the	frozen	air.
Again	both	struck	at	each	other	but	again	both	missed.	As	Humayun’s	opponent	tugged	hard	on	the
reins	to	make	a	third	attempt	on	Humayun,	his	horse	slipped	on	ice.	As	the	man	struggled	to	stay	in
the	saddle,	Humayun	turned	his	own	mount	sharply	and	was	on	him	before	he	could	regain	sufficient
control	to	swing	his	flail	properly.
Humayun	slashed	with	his	sword	and,	although	the	man	jerked	his	upper	body	out	of	the	way,	the
sword	cut	deep	into	his	attacker ’s	lower	thigh	just	above	the	knee,	severing	sinew	and	biting	into	the
bone.	Instinctively	the	man	dropped	his	flail	and	clutched	at	the	wound.	As	he	did	so,	Humayun	struck
him	again,	this	time	across	his	throat.	Fine	droplets	of	blood	spurted	into	the	cold	air	and	the	man	fell.
All	 around	 Humayun	 his	 troops	 were	 struggling	 with	 their	 opponents,	 whom	 they	 seemed	 to
outnumber.	 However,	 Humayun	 noticed	 that	 three	 of	 the	 enemy	 had	 surrounded	 Bairam	 Khan,	 who
had	become	isolated	from	the	rest	of	his	men.	Humayun	kicked	his	horse	towards	them.	Bairam	Khan
had	 lost	 his	 helmet	 and	 the	 blizzard	 was	 blowing	 his	 long	 black	 hair	 out	 behind	 him.	 He	 was
defending	himself	as	best	as	he	could,	wheeling	his	tall	black	horse	expertly	to	confront	each	of	his
attackers	 in	 turn.	 Nevertheless	 he	 was	 being	 hard	 pressed	 and	 was	 already	 bleeding	 from	 a	 deep
sword	cut	which	extended	from	his	left	ear	down	his	neck	to	the	top	of	his	breastplate.
The	 first	 that	 Bairam	 Khan’s	 assailants	 knew	 of	 Humayun’s	 arrival	 was	 the	 sword	 stroke	 which
knocked	one	of	their	number	from	his	saddle	and	the	second	was	the	blow	which	almost	severed	the
sword	arm	of	another	who	was	poised	to	thrust	his	weapon	deep	into	Bairam	Khan’s	exposed	side.
The	third	man	turned	to	flee	but	Bairam	Khan	cut	at	him	as	he	went,	leaving	him	trailing	blood	on	the
snow	 as	 he	 made	 good	 his	 escape.	 He	 was	 followed	 by	 all	 of	 Kamran’s	 men	 who	 were	 able	 to
disengage	themselves.	The	attack	had	ceased	as	suddenly	as	it	had	begun.	The	whole	thing	had	lasted
less	than	half	an	hour.
‘Pursue	them,’	shouted	Humayun	to	Zahid	Beg.	‘Kill	and	capture	as	many	as	you	can	but	take	care	–
others	may	be	waiting	in	further	ambushes	ahead.’	Dismounting,	he	ran	over	towards	Bairam	Khan,
who	was	slumped	in	his	saddle.	He	was	just	in	time	to	catch	the	Persian	as	he	fell	sideways.	Humayun
lowered	him	to	the	ground	and	began	to	staunch	his	wound	with	his	own	red	face	cloth.	‘Thank	you,
Majesty.	I	owe	you	my	life	.	.	.	I	will	repay	you,’	mumbled	Bairam	Khan,	grimacing	with	pain.
By	the	time	Zahid	Beg	and	his	men	rode	back	down	the	defile,	the	snow	had	stopped	and	the	pale
winter	sun	was	disappearing	behind	the	western	peaks,	throwing	long	shadows	across	the	battlefield
where	 Humayun	 was	 supervising	 the	 tending	 of	 Bairam	 Khan	 and	 the	 other	 wounded.	 Among	 the
riders	Humayun	noticed	a	number	of	captives,	bouncing	uncomfortably	on	their	saddles,	hands	tied
behind	their	backs	and	their	ankles	roped	beneath	their	horses’	bellies.

‘Zahid	Beg,	are	any	of	the	prisoners	ready	to	talk?	What	do	they	say?’
‘That	 they	 were	 a	 raiding	 party	 –	 no	 more	 than	 fifteen	 hundred	 in	 number	 and	 mostly	 local
tribesmen.	 Your	 half-brother	 had	 promised	 them	 large	 bounties	 if	 they	 achieved	 success	 –	 and	 in
particular	if	they	brought	him	your	head.’
‘We	 must	 remain	 alert	 against	 further	 attack.	 Post	 more	 pickets.	 Kamran	 will	 now	 know	 we’re
coming	–	and	from	what	direction	and	when.’

For	the	first	time	since	he	had	ridden	out	with	his	father	on	their	conquest	of	Hindustan	twenty-one
years	ago,	Humayun	gazed	at	the	place	of	his	birth.	The	walls	and	gates	of	the	city	of	Kabul,	just	half
a	mile	away,	were	mantled	in	snow.	Above	them	he	could	just	make	out	the	tops	of	the	high	arched
entrances	 of	 the	 caravanserais	 that	 accommodated	 the	 thousands	 of	 merchants	 who	 passed	 through
with	their	trade	goods	of	sugar,	cloth,	horses,	spices	and	gems,	bringing	so	much	wealth	to	Kabul.
On	a	rocky	ridge	overlooking	the	town	was	the	citadel.	Though	it	held	so	many	good	memories,
Humayun	 pushed	 them	 aside,	 assessing	 its	 thick	 mud-brick	 walls	 and	 squat	 towers	 with	 a
dispassionate,	appraising	eye.This	was	no	longer	the	boyhood	home	beneath	whose	walls	he’d	raced
his	pony	and	gone	hawking	but	his	enemy’s	stronghold	and	his	son’s	prison.	And	the	same	dilemma
faced	him	as	at	Kandahar.	How	could	he	overcome	his	enemy	and	rescue	Akbar	without	putting	his
son	in	greater	peril	than	he	already	was?	Even	though	Humayun’s	scouts	had	sometimes	seen	riders
shadowing	 their	 column	 who	 could	 only	 be	 Kamran’s	 men	 and	 chased	 them	 off,	 Kamran	 had
launched	 no	 further	 attacks.	 He	 must	 feel	 that	 Kabul	 was	 well	 stocked	 and	 prepared	 to	 withstand	 a
siege.
Little	 though	 Kamran	 had	 shown	 himself	 susceptible	 to	 either,	 Humayun	 decided	 he	 would	 again
try	 persuasion	 and	 reason.Tonight	 in	 their	 encampment	 sprawling	 across	 the	 frozen	 plain	 outside
Kabul	he	would	once	again	write	a	letter	for	his	half-sister	to	carry.	And	once	again,	his	offer	would
be	simple.	If	Kamran	would	release	Akbar	and	hand	over	Kabul,	he	and	his	men	could	depart	with	a
promise	 of	 safe	 passage.	 At	 least	 his	 position	 was	 stronger	 than	 when	 Gulbadan	 had	 delivered	 his
ultimatum	 to	 Askari	 at	 Kandahar,	 Humayun	 reflected.	 As	 he	 had	 drawn	 closer	 to	 Kabul,	 more	 and
more	 tribesmen	 had	 joined	 him.	 Though	 his	 own	 forces	 did	 not	 yet	 match	 the	 Persians,	 they	 now
numbered	nearly	eight	thousand	men.
Slapping	his	gauntleted	hands	against	his	sides	for	warmth,	Humayun	made	his	way	to	his	scarlet
command	tent	where	his	war	council	was	awaiting	him.	‘My	sister	is	courageous.	She	will	again	be
my	 envoy.	 But	 if	 Kamran	 rejects	 my	 proposal,	 we	 must	 be	 ready	 for	 an	 immediate	 attack	 on	 the
citadel.	Let	him	hear	our	cannon	roar.’
‘What	about	the	city	itself,	Majesty?’	asked	Bairam	Khan.	He	was	making	a	good	recovery	from	his
wound,	 although	 he	 could	 still	 scarcely	 turn	 his	 neck	 which	 remained	 heavily	 bandaged.	 He	 would
doubtless	have	gained	another	fine	scar.
‘Your	 Majesty’s	 half-brother	 will	 have	 garrisoned	 it,	 of	 course,’	 said	 Zahid	 Beg.	 ‘The	 soldiers
defending	it	may	fire	at	us	from	the	walls	so	we	must	keep	out	of	range	and	guard	and	entrench	our
camp	well.’
‘But	the	city’s	garrison	would	be	foolish	to	consider	sallying	out	to	attack	an	army	as	large	as	this,’
added	Bairam	Khan.

Humayun	now	spoke.	‘Also,	the	citizens	may	not	be	behind	them.	The	people	of	Kabul	have	grown
rich	on	trade.	They	want	peace	and	prosperity,	not	war.	Although	they	may	feel	no	especial	loyalty	to
me,	if	they	think	I	–	not	Kamran	–	will	be	the	eventual	victor,	they	might	even	rise	against	his	troops
to	gain	my	favour	as	they	once	did	for	my	father	against	his	enemies.	Take	the	necessary	measures
for	the	encirclement	of	the	city.	But	as	far	as	the	citadel	goes,	where	should	we	position	our	cannon	so
they	are	ready	for	immediate	action	if	my	half-brother	rejects	our	surrender	terms?’
Zahid	Beg	answered.	‘Take	them	up	the	road	to	the	citadel	to	the	most	advanced	position	we	can
locate	 for	 them	 which	 will	 not	 expose	 our	 artillerymen	 to	 direct	 musket	 and	 arrow	 fire	 from	 the
citadel	walls	as	they	go	about	their	work.’
‘I	 agree.’	 Humayun	 nodded.	 ‘That	 rocky	 outcrop	 where	 the	 road	 makes	 its	 final	 turn	 before	 the
gates	would	make	a	suitable	position,	I	think.	Also,	if	our	men	establish	themselves	there,	Kamran’s
own	 gunners	 will	 find	 it	 difficult	 to	 depress	 their	 cannon	 far	 enough	 to	 fire	 on	 them.	 Our	 target
should	be	the	main	gates	themselves.	Though	metal-bound	and	protected	by	a	heavy	iron	grille,	they
will	 not	 withstand	 a	 sustained	 bombardment.	 We	 should	 also	 aim	 at	 the	 outer	 walls	 directly	 to	 their
right.	As	I	recall,	that	stretch	is	older	and	not	quite	so	thick	as	the	rest.’
‘Our	main	problem	will	be	whether	the	shot	will	carry	with	sufficient	force	from	the	position	you
suggest,’	said	Zahid	Beg.
‘What	do	you	think,	Rustum	Beg?’	asked	Humayun.	‘Can	your	gunners	wreak	sufficient	destruction
from	that	range?’
The	elderly	Persian	looked	at	his	second-in-command	for	an	answer.‘There	should	be	no	problem,
Majesty,’	said	Bairam	Khan,	dark	blue	eyes	thoughtful.	‘The	only	pity	is	that	our	cannon	are	small.	If
we’d	been	able	to	bring	bigger	guns	from	Kazvin,	we	could	have	reduced	the	walls	more	quickly.	But
at	least	we	have	plenty	of	powder	and	stone	shot.’
‘Excellent.	I	know	it	will	take	time	for	the	cannon	to	have	their	effect,	but	immediately	we	see	that
we	have	made	a	sufficient	breach	I	want	troops	ready	to	charge	in	waves	up	the	ramp	under	cover	of
our	archers	and	musketeers	to	gain	entrance	to	the	citadel.	Bairam	Khan	and	Zahid	Beg,	I	leave	it	to
you	to	select	the	detachments	to	train	to	make	the	assault	and	the	men	to	lead	them.	Most	important,
keep	units	of	cavalry	ready	at	all	times	to	pursue	any	who	try	to	flee	the	citadel.	My	half-brother	must
not	be	allowed	to	escape	or	try	to	spirit	my	son	out	of	my	reach.’

‘If	Kamran	had	dismissed	her	appeal	out	of	hand,	she	would	be	back	by	now,	wouldn’t	she?’	asked
Hamida.	Despite	the	bitter	cold	and	occasional	flurries	of	snow,	she	had	been	standing	in	front	of	the
women’s	tent	staring	towards	the	main	gate	of	the	citadel	of	Kabul	ever	since	Gulbadan	had	climbed
into	 a	 closed,	 curtained	 wagon	 pulled	 by	 two	 mules	 and,	 preceded	 by	 Jauhar	 with	 a	 flag	 of	 truce,
made	her	way	up	the	ramp	to	the	citadel.	After	five	minutes	one	of	the	gates	had	opened	and	she	had
disappeared	inside.
‘Not	necessarily.	Kamran	is	malicious	enough	to	be	amused	by	keeping	her	and	us	waiting	for	a
reply	even	if	he	has	decided	to	release	Akbar,’	answered	Humayun.
‘Yes.	 If	 he	 is	 evil	 enough	 to	 rob	 a	 woman	 of	 her	 small	 child	 to	 further	 his	 ambitions,	 he	 is	 evil
enough	for	anything.’
‘But	they	may	be	assembling	Akbar ’s	things.’	Humayun	offered	a	suggestion	of	comfort	he	could

not	believe	in	himself.
‘Look,	the	gate	is	opening	again,’	gasped	Hamida,	shielding	her	eyes	from	the	glare	reflected	off
the	snow	by	the	sun	which	had	just	broken	through	the	clouds.‘Perhaps	the	sunlight	is	a	good	omen.’
‘Perhaps,’	 Humayun	 replied.	 Jauhar	 on	 his	 grey	 horse	 was	 the	 first	 to	 emerge	 through	 the	 gate
followed	a	minute	later	by	Gulbadan’s	cart,	which	began	to	make	its	way	slowly	down	the	ramp.
‘The	curtains	are	still	closed.	Perhaps	Akbar	is	inside,’	said	Hamida.
‘Maybe,’	Humayun	replied.	As	he	spoke	the	sun	went	behind	the	clouds	again.
Ten	minutes	later,	the	small	procession	reached	the	women’s	tent.	Even	before	the	wagon	came	to	a
full	stop	Gulbadan	pulled	back	the	curtains	and	prepared	to	descend.	She	had	no	need	to	speak.	From
her	unsmiling	face	and	grim	expression	both	Humayun	and	Hamida	knew	that	Akbar	was	not	in	the
cart	 and,	 even	 worse,	 that	 Kamran’s	 answer	 had	 extinguished	 any	 hopes	 they	 had	 cherished	 of	 his
early	recovery.	Hamida	dropped	to	her	knees	in	the	cold,	wet	snow	weeping	uncontrollably.	Humayun
raised	her	gently	and	held	her	in	his	arms.
‘I	know	what	you	are	feeling.’
‘No,	 you	 cannot,’	 sobbed	 Hamida.	 ‘Only	 a	 mother	 can.’	 Twisting	 herself	 away	 she	 ran	 into	 the
snow-covered	women’s	tent.	Humayun	watched	her	go,	then,	shaking	with	anger	and	disappointment,
he	 walked	 over	 to	 Gulbadan	 and	 led	 her	 into	 the	 tent.	 Once	 inside	 he	 dismissed	 all	 their	 attendants.
‘What	did	he	say?	he	asked	when	they	were	alone.
‘Very	 little.	 Kamran	 kept	 me	 waiting	 for	 a	 long	 time	 .	 .	 .	 When	 he	 did	 finally	 admit	 me	 he	 was
alone,	seated	on	our	father	Babur ’s	gilded	throne	–	the	throne	of	Kabul.	He	made	no	effort	to	rise	to
greet	 me.	 I	 passed	 him	 your	 letter	 and	 he	 scanned	 it	 briefly.	 Then,	 smiling	 to	 himself,	 he	 scribbled
this.’	She	handed	Humayun	a	folded	piece	of	paper.	‘He	tossed	it	to	me,	saying	simply,	“Give	him	this
and	tell	him	to	be	off.”	I	persisted	and	begged	him	to	release	Akbar,	if	not	for	your	sake	then	for	mine
and	his	mother ’s.	His	only	response	was,	“What	kind	of	fool	do	you	think	I	am?	If	you’ve	nothing
worthwhile	to	say,	go.”	I	turned	and	left.	I	would	not	give	him	the	satisfaction	of	humiliating	myself
further	by	begging	more	or	by	weeping.’
‘You	did	right,’	said	Hamida,	embracing	Gulbadan	who	in	turn	succumbed	to	tears.	‘I	will	weep	no
more,	and	no	more	must	you.	Humayun,	what	does	Kamran’s	letter	say?	We	must	be	sure	it	contains
no	new	treachery.’
Humayun	 unfolded	 the	 note	 and	 read	 out	 the	 contents,	 written	 in	 the	 impatient	 spiky	 hand	 that
Humayun	remembered	from	their	boyhood.
‘“You	gave	me	your	word	to	leave	these	lands	for	Persia	but	you	have	broken	it	and	returned	with	a
foreign	army	at	your	back	to	threaten	me.You	dare	to	offer	me	safe	conduct	out	of	a	kingdom	I	have
made	my	own	–	you,	who	failed	to	hold	the	lands	our	father	won	beyond	the	Khyber	Pass,	you,	who
have	lost	everything	our	father	created.	I	sit	on	his	throne	now.You	are	the	interloper	here,	not	me.
Get	on	your	way	back	to	Persia	and	exile.”’
Hamida	broke	the	silence	first.	‘He	will	not	listen	to	soft	women’s	pleas	or	to	your	merciful	and
reasoned	offer.	Make	him	pay	in	blood	for	his	callousness	and	cruelty.’
‘I	 will,’	 replied	 Humayun	 and	 strode	 to	 the	 entrance	 of	 the	 tent.	 Pulling	 back	 one	 of	 the	 flaps	 he
called	to	Jauhar	who	was	warming	his	hands	over	a	brazier	of	glowing	coals.	‘Jauhar,	we	have	our
answer	from	my	brother.	It	is	war.	Summon	my	council.	We	attack	at	dawn.’

The	 snow	 that	 had	 been	 falling	 through	 most	 of	 the	 previous	 day	 and	 night	 and	 had	 helped	 shield
Humayun’s	 Persian	 gunners	 as	 they	 had	 manoeuvred	 their	 cannon	 into	 position	 was	 easing	 as	 they
fired	their	first	shots.	From	his	command	position	sheltered	behind	another	rocky	outcrop	about	fifty
yards	behind	the	gunners,	Humayun	watched	the	teams	of	men	–	five	per	gun	–	in	their	leather	jerkins,
trousers	and	pointed	steel	helmets	as	they	went	to	work,	grunting	with	effort	as	they	heaved	linen	bags
filled	with	gunpowder	and	then	the	stone	shot	into	the	bronze	barrels,	ramming	them	down	hard.	Next
they	inserted	the	sharp	metal	spikes	of	their	awls	into	the	touch-holes	to	puncture	the	powder	bags	and
carefully	sprinkled	a	little	extra	loose	powder	around	the	holes.	Finally,	as	the	rest	stood	well	back,
one	 man	 from	 each	 team	 approached	 his	 gun.	 In	 his	 hands	 was	 a	 long	 forked	 staff	 to	 which	 was
attached	a	taper	of	oil-soaked	cord,	the	tip	lit	and	smouldering	orange-red,	which	he	applied	to	the
touch-hole	before	leaping	back.
Though	 physically	 gruelling	 –	 Humayun	 could	 see	 sweat	 rising	 from	 them	 in	 the	 cold	 air	 like
steam	–	the	men	made	the	process	look	smooth	and	quick,	from	the	thuds	as	the	powder	and	shot	were
loaded	to	the	brilliant	flash	as	the	charge	ignited.	Humayun	watched	as	they	fired	shot	after	shot.	The
first	few	fell	several	yards	short	and	a	little	too	far	to	the	west,	but	Bairam	Khan’s	men	quickly	made
the	 necessary	 adjustments	 to	 the	 angle	 of	 the	 barrels	 –	 by	 driving	 wedges	 under	 the	 cannon’s	 front
wheels	–	and	to	the	amount	of	powder	they	were	using.	Now	the	majority	of	shots	were	finding	their
mark,	pounding	the	gates	and	the	mud-brick	walls	from	which	a	plume	of	red-brown	dust	was	soon
rising	steadily.
Several	of	Kamran’s	musketeers	were	firing	at	the	artillerymen	from	the	walls	of	the	citadel,	but	to
avoid	 hitting	 the	 rocks	 protecting	 the	 cannon	 they	 had	 to	 bend	 over	 the	 wall	 and	 show	 themselves
fully.	Although	they	had	at	first	had	some	success	in	wounding	a	few	of	Humayun’s	gunners,	his	own
musketeers	had	now	managed	to	get	into	advanced	positions	where	they	were,	in	turn,	firing	at	any	of
Kamran’s	 men	 who	 exposed	 themselves	 over	 the	 battlements.	 They	 hit	 two	 of	 them	 who,	 dropping
their	weapons,	toppled	from	the	walls	clawing	at	the	air	to	smash	themselves	on	the	rocks	below.	The
rest	were	now	keeping	under	cover	and	any	shots	they	fired	were	hasty,	wild	and	wide.
Humayun	saw	Zahid	Beg	galloping	up	on	a	broad-chested	white	horse.	‘All	seems	quiet	in	the	city,
Majesty,’	he	yelled	above	the	booming	of	the	guns.	‘Soldiers	are	watching	our	bombardment	of	the
citadel	from	the	walls	but	none	has	fired	on	our	troops	encircling	the	city	or	made	any	attempt	to	ride
out	to	attack	us	in	the	rear.	It	is	as	you	predicted	–	they’ve	no	stomach	for	a	fight	against	such	odds.
But	the	city	walls	behind	which	they	are	hiding	and	in	particular	the	citadel	walls	are	strong.	We	will
need	time	and	persistence	to	conquer.’

‘Majesty,	they’ve	made	a	breach	in	the	citadel	wall.’	Zainab	shook	Humayun	awake	as	he	lay	next	to
Hamida.	‘Bairam	Khan	is	outside.’	As	he	struggled	to	consciousness,	Humayun	could	not	help	feeling
a	 sudden	 rush	 of	 joy.	 Now	 surely	 Kabul	 would	 be	 his	 and	 Akbar	 would	 be	 rescued.	 He	 dressed
himself	quickly	and	carelessly	and	stumbled	outside	into	the	night	cold.	‘Where	is	the	breach,	Bairam
Khan?’
‘To	the	right	of	the	gate	where	you	suggested	that	the	wall	was	weakest.’
‘How	big?’
‘Not	large	but	big	enough,	I	think,	if	we	act	now.	I’ve	given	orders	already	to	our	musketeers	and

archers	 as	 well	 as	 to	 our	 artillerymen	 to	 keep	 up	 a	 heavy	 fire	 to	 dissuade	 the	 defenders	 from
attempting	to	repair	it.	Dawn	is	in	an	hour	and	a	half	and	I	can	have	a	force	ready	to	attack	then	if	you
give	the	order.’
‘Do	it.’
Low	 dark	 clouds	 obscured	 the	 winter	 sun	 and	 a	 bitter	 wind	 was	 blowing	 as	 the	 day	 dawned	 and
Humayun,	now	dressed	for	battle,	spoke	to	the	assault	force	gathered	around	him	at	the	bottom	of	the
ramp	leading	up	to	the	citadel.
‘I	know	the	bravery	and	loyalty	of	each	man	here	and	am	proud	to	go	into	battle	with	you.	It	is	a
bitter	 thing	 to	 have	 to	 fight	 against	 one’s	 own	 blood,	 but	 not	 content	 with	 usurping	 my	 throne	 my
treacherous	half-brother	Kamran	has	betrayed	every	code	of	kinship	and	honour	by	stealing	my	son,
an	innocent	child.	In	doing	so	he	sullies	the	proud	honour	of	the	Moghuls.	But	together	we	can	wipe
clean	the	insult	and	punish	the	usurper.	No	more	words	–	to	battle!’
Humayun	 charged	 forward	 at	 the	 head	 of	 his	 men	 with	 Bairam	 Khan	 at	 his	 side.	 Both	 were
breathing	 hard	 as,	 sometimes	 skidding	 on	 patches	 of	 ice,	 they	 ran	 as	 best	 they	 could	 up	 the	 frozen
ramp	through	the	white	cannon	smoke	towards	the	citadel’s	gate.	The	sound	of	his	own	musket	and
cannon	shot	was	partly	deafening	him	but	through	a	gap	in	the	smoke	Humayun	saw	there	was	indeed
a	jagged	breach	in	the	right-hand	wall	by	the	gate.	His	spirits	soared.	Then,	to	his	surprise,	he	realised
there	was	scarcely	any	return	fire	from	the	walls	of	the	citadel.
Suddenly,	as	he	watched,	he	saw	through	another	gap	in	the	billowing	smoke	some	sort	of	activity
on	the	battlements	directly	above	the	gateway.	Was	Kamran	preparing	to	surrender?	He	could	scarcely
believe	it.	He	shouted	to	his	gunners	and	musketeers	to	cease	fire,	then	moved	forward	again	to	get	a
better	 look.	 As	 the	 acrid	 smoke	 began	 to	 clear,	 he	 saw	 that	 Kamran’s	 soldiers	 were	 erecting	 what
looked	like	a	wooden	stake	on	the	battlements.	Then	more	soldiers	appeared,	pushing	in	front	of	them
a	tall	figure	with	long,	flowing	hair	silhouetted	against	the	grey	dawn	sky.	Humayun	ran	closer	until
he	could	see	that	the	figure	was	a	woman	and	that	she	was	holding	something	in	her	arms.	Something
that	wriggled	and	writhed	–	a	child.
The	 blood	 in	 Humayun’s	 veins	 ceased	 to	 flow.	 He	 watched	 like	 a	 man	 in	 a	 trance	 as	 the	 soldiers
bound	the	woman	to	the	stake,	wrapping	what	looked	like	a	length	of	rope	or	chain	around	her	body
but	 leaving	 her	 arms	 free	 to	 continue	 clutching	 her	 living	 burden.	 That	 burden,	 Humayun	 knew
beyond	a	shadow	of	a	doubt,	was	his	son,	held	in	the	arms	of	his	wet-nurse	Maham	Anga.
A	great	cry	tore	from	him.	‘No!’	By	now,	Zahid	Beg	and	Bairam	Khan	were	by	his	side,	staring	as
he	 was	 at	 the	 sight	 of	 the	 woman	 and	 child	 exposed	 on	 the	 walls,	 living	 targets	 of	 flesh	 and
blood.Wrenching	 his	 gaze	 away	 at	 last,	 Humayun	 put	 his	 head	 in	 his	 hands.	 Once	 again	 he’d
underestimated	his	half-brother.	This	was	what	Kamran’s	response	had	meant	–	continue	your	attack
and	you	will	be	your	son’s	assassin.
‘Bairam	Khan,	call	off	the	bombardment.	I	cannot	risk	my	son	.	.	.	Zahid	Beg,	post	strong	enough
detachments	to	keep	the	city	and	the	citadel	under	siege	but	recall	the	assault	troops	to	the	camp.’
As	kettledrums	and	trumpets	sounded	and	his	forces	began	to	pull	back	across	the	snow-covered
plain	to	their	tents,	Humayun	turned	and	without	a	further	word	to	anyone	–	neither	his	commanders
nor	his	bodyguard	–	made	his	slow	way	back.	Though	the	sun	was	breaking	through	now,	thin,	pale
shafts	lightening	the	sky,	his	own	world	had	never	seemed	so	lost	in	shadow.	How	was	he	going	to
bring	his	campaign	to	a	successful	conclusion?	What	was	he	going	to	say	to	Hamida?

Chapter	18
A	Visitor	in	the	Night
‘Rustum	Beg,	I	don’t	understand.Howcan	you	speak	of	leaving?’
‘Majesty,	my	cousin	Shah	Tahmasp,	the	Lord	of	the	World,	gave	me	explicit	orders	before	we	left
Kazvin	that	if	your	campaign	faltered	–	if	after	six	months	it	seemed	to	me	unlikely	that	you	would
succeed	–	I	must	lead	his	troops	home.	I	have	been	patient	but	now	that	time	has	come.	It’s	over	six
months	since	we	rode	from	Persia	.	.	.	two	months	since	we	ceased	the	bombardment	and	began	this
fruitless	 siege	 of	 Kabul.	 My	 men	 are	 suffering	 in	 the	 bitter	 cold	 and	 harsh	 conditions,	 and	 to	 what
end?	The	town	and	the	citadel	are	well	provisioned	–	your	brother ’s	soldiers	taunt	us	from	the	walls,
offering	us	food	.	.	.	I	am	sorry,	Majesty,	but	I	have	no	choice.	The	shah	can	find	better	employment
for	his	troops	elsewhere	.	.	.	’	Rustum	Beg	raised	his	hands,	palm	up,	as	if	he	personally	regretted	a
situation	that	was	beyond	his	control.	But	during	the	past	half-hour	since	he	had	asked	for	a	private
audience	with	Humayun,	though	courteous	as	ever,	he	had	conceded	nothing.
By	now	shock	and	surprise	had	given	way	in	Humayun	to	an	anger	he	was	struggling	to	contain.
‘As	I’ve	told	you,	Shah	Tahmasp	said	nothing	to	me	about	deadlines	or	timescales.	He	called	himself
my	brother	and	offered	me	his	help	to	reclaim	not	only	my	ancestral	homelands	but	also	the	throne	of
Hindustan	.	.	.	He	understood	it	would	take	time.	We	spoke	of	it	together	.	.	.	’
‘I’m	sorry,	Majesty.	If	I	don’t	take	my	troops	back	to	Persia	I	will	be	disobeying	my	orders.	That	I
cannot	do.’
‘Well,	when	you	reach	Kazvin	tell	your	cousin	this	–	that	I	will	continue	the	fight	and	however	long
it	takes	I	will	crush	my	enemies	so	completely	they	never	rise	again.	And	when	I	once	more	sit	on	my
throne	in	Agra	I	will	have	the	satisfaction	of	knowing	that	the	glory	of	the	achievement	belongs	to	the
Moghuls	and	the	Moghuls	alone.’
Rustum	Beg’s	face	remained	impassive.
‘When	will	you	leave?’
‘In	 three	 or	 four	 days,	 Majesty,	 as	 soon	 as	 my	 men	 are	 ready.	 I	 will	 leave	 you	 the	 cannon.	 They
were	the	shah’s	gift	to	you.’
If	Rustum	Beg	expected	his	gratitude	he	would	be	disappointed,	Humayun	thought	as	he	rose	to	his
feet	 to	 indicate	 the	 interview	 was	 over.	 ‘I	 wish	 you	 and	 your	 men	 a	 safe	 passage	 back	 through	 the
mountains.	Tell	the	shah	that	I	thank	him	for	the	assistance	he	gave	me	and	only	regret	that	it	proved
so	short-lived.’
‘I	will,	Majesty.	And	may	fortune	one	day	shine	on	you	again.’
After	 Rustum	 Beg	 had	 left,	 Humayun	 sat	 for	 a	 while	 alone.	 The	 Persian	 commander ’s
announcement	 had	 come	 without	 warning.	 He	 needed	 time	 to	 think	 it	 through	 and	 fathom	 a	 way
forward.	At	least	his	own	men	nearly	matched	the	Persians	in	numbers	now	and	these	were	their	own
lands	they	were	fighting	in.	They	were	hardened	to	the	conditions	and	would	not	be	deterred	by	snow,
ice	and	the	bitter	winds	that	buffeted	the	encampment,	exposed	as	it	was	on	the	plains.	Almost	as	much
as	the	loss	of	the	Persian	forces,	what	galled	Humayun	was	Rustum	Beg’s	dismissive	assessment	of

his	chances.	Since	the	first	day	of	the	siege,	Humayun	had	never	allowed	himself	to	lose	heart,	hoping
each	day	to	find	a	way	of	breaking	his	enemy	.	.	.	of	detecting	some	weakness	in	Kamran’s	position.
And	 even	 if	 such	 a	 breakthrough	 didn’t	 come,	 he	 need	 only	 have	 patience	 –	 inevitably	 Kamran’s
supplies	would	run	out.
Sometimes,	of	course,	it	took	as	much	fortitude	to	be	patient	as	to	ride	into	battle.	The	memory	of
his	infant	son	on	the	battlements	was	all	that	was	preventing	Humayun	from	assaulting	the	citadel	with
everything	he	had.	Perhaps	Rustum	Beg	had	interpreted	his	feelings	for	his	son	–	his	unwillingness	to
call	Kamran’s	bluff	–	as	weakness.	Well,	so	be	it.	If	he	must,	he	would	–	just	as	he	had	told	Rustum
Beg	–	fight	on	alone.
Through	the	tent	flap	that	still	hung	partially	open,	Humayun	saw	the	wintry	light	was	fading.	Soon
he	 would	 summon	 his	 commanders	 to	 tell	 them	 what	 had	 happened.	 They	 might	 be	 glad	 to	 see	 the
Persians	gone.The	camaraderie	that	had	existed	in	the	early	days	when	Humayun	led	his	forces	out	of
Persia	had	ebbed	as	more	and	more	of	the	clans	around	Kabul	had	come	to	swell	his	numbers.	Only
three	 days	 ago,	 Zahid	 Beg	 had	 told	 him	 of	 a	 violent	 incident	 between	 his	 men	 and	 the	 Persians.	 A
Tajik	chieftain,	believing	some	Persian	soldiers	had	stolen	some	of	his	stores,	had	called	them	Shiite
dogs.	In	the	ensuing	brawl,	one	of	the	Tajik’s	men	had	been	stabbed	in	the	cheek	and	a	Persian	badly
burned	on	one	side	of	his	body	when	he	was	thrown	against	a	brazier	of	blazing	logs.	Perhaps	it	was
better	 that	 the	 Kizilbashi	 –	 the	 ‘Red-heads’,	 as	 Humayun’s	 men	 called	 the	 Persians	 for	 their	 conical
red	 caps	 with	 strips	 of	 scarlet	 cloth	 hanging	 down	 behind	 to	 proclaim	 their	 Shiite	 faith	 –	 should
depart.	He	himself	would	immediately	renounce	his	token	adherence	to	the	Shia	sect.	That	too	would
hearten	his	men.
The	sound	of	voices	outside	his	command	tent	interrupted	Humayun’s	thoughts.	Then	the	tent	flap
was	pushed	back	and	Jauhar	ducked	inside.	‘Majesty,	Bairam	Khan	asks	to	see	you.’
‘Very	well.’
As	Bairam	Khan	entered	Humayun	noticed	that	the	scar	on	his	neck	was	pink	and	puckered	and	still
very	 new-looking.	 He	 was	 a	 good	 fighter	 and	 a	 clever	 tactician.	 Though	 Rustum	 Beg	 was	 overall
commander	of	the	Persian	forces,	it	had	been	obvious	to	Humayun	almost	from	the	start	that	Bairam
Khan	was	their	true	leader	and	general.	He	would	be	sorry	to	lose	him.
‘What	is	it,	Bairam	Khan?’
Bairam	 Khan	 hesitated,	 as	 if	 what	 he	 wished	 to	 say	 wasn’t	 easy.	 Then,	 fixing	 his	 indigo	 eyes	 on
Humayun’s	face,	he	began.	‘I	know	what	Rustum	Beg	has	told	you	.	.	.	I	am	sorry.’
‘No	blame	attaches	to	you.	What	I	am	sorry	for	is	that	I	will	lose	you—’
‘Majesty,’	the	usually	courteous	Bairam	Khan	broke	in,	‘hear	me	out.	When	we	were	attacked	in	the
defile	 on	 the	 way	 to	 Kabul,	 you	 saved	 me.	 Never	 in	 all	 the	 battles	 I	 have	 fought	 had	 I	 felt	 death	 so
close	.	.	.	in	my	mind’s	eye	I	already	saw	my	grave	dug	in	that	lonely	place.	But	you	gave	my	life	back
to	me.	I	have	come	to	ask	you	to	let	me	repay	you.’
‘There	is	no	debt,	Bairam	Khan.	I	only	did	what	any	man	on	the	battlefield	would	do	when	he	sees	a
comrade	–	a	friend	–	in	danger.’
‘I	do	not	wish	to	return	to	Persia	with	Rustum	Beg	but	to	remain	with	you	and	do	all	in	my	power
to	further	your	cause.	Will	you	take	me	into	your	service?’
Humayun	rose,	and	stepping	forward	gripped	Bairam	Khan’s	arm.	‘There	is	no	man	in	the	entire
Persian	army	I	would	rather	have	fighting	by	my	side	.	.	.	’

‘Majesties	.	.	.	Majesties	.	.	.	wake	up.’	Someone	was	gently	shaking	his	shoulder	.	.	.	or	was	it	just	a
dream?	Humayun	moved	closer	to	the	soft	warmth	of	Hamida’s	body	lying	close	beside	him.	But	the
shaking	 grew	 more	 insistent.	 Humayun	 opened	 his	 eyes	 to	 see	 Zainab,	 an	 oil	 lamp	 in	 her	 hand,
standing	 over	 them.	 In	 the	 flickering	 light,	 he	 saw	 she	 looked	 excited,	 the	 birthmark	 on	 her	 face
seeming	more	pronounced	than	usual.
‘What	is	it?’	Beside	him,	Hamida	opened	sleepy	eyes.
‘Half	an	hour	ago	a	man	tried	to	ride	into	the	camp.	When	the	pickets	challenged	him,	he	would	not
say	 who	 he	 was	 but	 asked	 to	 be	 taken	 to	 Zahid	 Beg.	 After	 talking	 to	 him,	 Zahid	 Beg,	 knowing	 you
were	with	Her	Majesty	in	the	women’s	tents,	sent	for	me	and	asked	me	to	summon	you.’
‘Why	the	urgency?	Can’t	it	wait	till	sunrise?’
‘Zahid	Beg	told	me	nothing	.	.	.	only	to	ask	that	you	come	at	once	.	.	.	’
‘Very	well.’	Humayun	rose	and	wrapping	a	long,	sheepskin-lined	coat	around	him	stepped	out	into
the	chilling	wind.	Who	could	it	be?	Perhaps	Kamran	had	sent	a	messenger,	though	why	he	should	do
so	by	dead	of	night	was	a	mystery.	By	the	light	of	a	brazier	of	glowing	charcoals,	he	saw	Zahid	Beg
standing	 beside	 a	 tall,	 square-shouldered	 man	 wearing	 a	 dark	 cloak	 with	 the	 hood	 pulled	 forward
concealing	his	face.	Could	it	be	an	assassin	sent	by	Kamran	.	.	.	or	even	by	the	Shah	of	Persia?
‘Is	he	armed,	Zahid	Beg?’
‘No,	Majesty.	He	volunteered	to	let	us	search	him.’
As	Humayun	drew	closer,	the	man	pushed	the	hood	back	with	a	slow,	deliberate	gesture.	Even	in	the
shadowy	light	from	the	brazier,	Humayun	knew	at	once	that	it	was	Hindal,	thick-set	face	now	heavily
bearded	but	still	unmistakably	his	half-brother.	For	a	moment,	the	two	of	them	stared	at	one	another	in
silence.	 Despite	 all	 that	 had	 happened	 since,	 memories	 of	 Hindal	 were	 suddenly	 vivid	 again	 in
Humayun’s	mind	–	of	Hindal	as	a	baby	in	Maham’s	arms,	of	how	he	had	taught	his	younger	brother	to
ride	his	first	pony,	of	Hindal’s	joy	when	he	had	shot	his	first	rabbit;	then	later	memories	of	the	look
on	Hindal’s	face	at	the	time	of	his	rebellion,	of	how	he	had	loyally	accompanied	Humayun	on	his	first
journey	as	an	exile	to	Mirza	Husain	and	Maldeo;	then	above	all	of	their	last	meeting	–	how	they	had
pounded	each	other	with	their	fists	over	Hamida	and	how,	after	spitting	at	Humayun’s	feet,	a	bleeding,
bruised	but	still	defiant	Hindal	had	ridden	away.
‘Leave	 us,	 please,	 and	 make	 sure	 no	 one	 disturbs	 us.’	 Humayun	 waited	 until	 Zahid	 Beg	 had
disappeared	into	the	darkness,	all	the	while	looking	hard	at	Hindal,	then	asked,	‘Why	have	you	come
here?	And	why	alone,	placing	yourself	in	my	power	like	this?’
‘For	some	months	–	since	escaping	from	Kamran	–	I	have	been	taking	refuge	with	my	remaining
loyal	 friends	 in	 the	 high	 hills	 of	 Jagish,	 northeast	 of	 Kabul.	 But	 news	 travels	 even	 to	 such	 remote
regions.	I	learned	what	Kamran	had	done	–	how	he	had	exposed	Akbar	on	the	battlements	of	the	Kabul
citadel	as	your	cannon	pounded	its	walls.	His	actions	shocked	me	–	they	defy	everything	noble	in	our
warrior	code	and	stain	our	family’s	honour.’
‘Fine	sentiments,	but	you	still	haven’t	answered	my	question.	Let	us	be	frank	with	one	another.	Why
have	you	come?’
‘To	help	get	Akbar	back.’
Humayun	was	so	astonished	that	for	a	few	moments	he	could	only	stare	at	the	massive	figure	of	his
half-brother,	calmly	warming	his	large	hands	over	the	brazier.
‘I	know	what	you’re	thinking.’	Hindal	filled	the	silence.	‘You	are	asking	yourself	why	I	should	wish
to	 help	 you.	 It’s	 simple.	 Despite	 the	 blood	 ties	 that	 will	 bind	 us	 till	 death,	 you	 and	 I	 will	 never	 be
reconciled.	That	won’t	change.	I	have	come	here	tonight	for	Hamida	and	Hamida	alone	.	.	.	to	help
relieve	her	agony	by	offering	to	bring	her	child	back	to	her	.	.	.	She	must	be	suffering	.	.	.	’

Humayun	 shifted	 uneasily,	 uncomfortable	 about	 talking	 to	 Hindal	 about	 Hamida	 at	 all	 and	 even
more	so	to	be	talking	to	him	about	how	he	had	failed	her	by	being	unable	to	recover	her	son.
‘If	you	have	truly	come	with	thoughts	of	easing	Hamida’s	grief,	I	am	grateful	to	you.’	He	paused
again,	 then	 made	 up	 his	 mind	 to	 swallow	 his	 pride.	 ‘To	 be	 honest	 as	 I	 said	 we	 should	 be,	 she	 has
known	no	true	rest	or	peace	of	mind	since	Akbar	was	taken	.	.	.	But	when	you	speak	of	help,	what	do
you	 mean?	 I	 have	 been	 besieging	 the	 citadel	 for	 nearly	 four	 months	 with	 no	 success.	 What	 do	 you
think	you	can	do	alone	that	I	can’t	with	my	army?’
‘I	can	win	Kamran’s	confidence	and	get	into	the	citadel.	Once	inside,	I	can	find	a	way	of	rescuing
Akbar.’
‘How?	Why	should	Kamran	trust	you	any	more	than	me?’
‘I	can	do	it	because	I	understand	him,	because	I	know	his	weaknesses.	He	despises	you	and	believes
he	is	the	natural	head	of	our	family.	I	will	use	his	conceit,	his	vanity,	to	convince	him	that	I	have	come
to	my	senses	and	wish	to	be	his	ally	again	.	.	.	to	reunite	the	rest	of	Babur ’s	sons	behind	him	against
you.	But	it	all	depends	on	creating	an	illusion	.	.	.	’
‘Go	on.’
‘You	must	raise	the	siege	and	make	it	appear	you	are	leading	your	forces	away	from	Kabul.	That
will	 leave	 the	 way	 clear	 for	 me	 to	 bring	 my	 own	 men	 down	 from	 the	 hills	 and	 offer	 Kamran	 an
alliance	.	.	.	’
‘You	are	suggesting	I	abandon	the	siege	after	so	many	weeks,	just	when	I	might	at	last	be	tightening
the	screw	on	Kamran?’
‘You	 must.	 My	 plan	 can’t	 work	 if	 you	 are	 still	 encamped	 anywhere	 near	 Kabul.	 Kamran	 must
believe	you’ve	given	up.’
‘You	ask	too	much.	For	all	I	know	you’ve	already	made	your	peace	with	Kamran	and	he’s	sent	you
here	to	try	and	trick	me.’
‘I	am	ready	to	swear	on	our	father ’s	memory	that	this	is	no	subterfuge	.	.	.	’	Hindal’s	tawny	eyes
returned	Humayun’s	gaze	unflinchingly.
‘Very	well	–	assuming	I	do	as	you	suggest,	what	happens	then?’
‘Kamran	will	think	he’s	got	the	better	of	you.	In	his	elation	he	will	be	all	the	more	ready	to	accept
my	story	–	that	since	not	even	you	have	been	able	to	overcome	him,	I	am	ready	to	acknowledge	and
serve	him	as	our	father ’s	true	heir.’
‘You	really	think	he	will	believe	you?’
‘Don’t	underestimate	his	conceit.	After	all,	why	shouldn’t	he	believe	me?	Why	shouldn’t	I	wish	to
exchange	 the	 life	 of	 a	 renegade	 in	 the	 hills	 for	 a	 share	 of	 the	 reflected	 glory	 of	 a	 Moghul	 prince
whose	star	is	rising	as	yours	wanes?	And	he	will	be	glad	of	the	extra	men	I	can	bring	him.	Then	once
inside	the	citadel	I	will	find	a	way	of	smuggling	Akbar	out	of	Kabul	.	.	.	but	it	will	take	time.	Not	only
must	I	win	Kamran’s	trust	but	I	must	also	find	the	right	opportunity	.	.	.	’
‘What	about	Kamran’s	mother	Gulrukh?	She’s	as	shrewd	as	–	probably	shrewder	than	–	her	son.	If
she	is	with	him	she	won’t	be	easy	to	deceive.’
Hindal	 looked	 surprised.	 ‘Gulrukh’s	 dead.The	 bullock	 cart	 in	 which	 she	 was	 travelling	 from
Kandahar	to	Kabul	fell	into	a	ravine.	I	thought	you	would	have	heard.’
‘No.’	Humayun	digested	the	news.	He	could	feel	little	sorrow	for	the	woman	who	had	tempted	him
with	her	potions	of	opium	and	wine	to	further	her	sons’	ambitions.	‘Even	so,	you	would	be	putting
yourself	at	great	risk.	Just	assuming	you	succeeded,	what	would	you	want	from	me?’
‘Nothing.	You	have	taken	everything	I	wanted	and	you	cannot	give	it	back	.	.	.	’
For	 a	 moment	 they	 looked	 at	 one	 another	 in	 silence.	 Now	 that	 he	 was	 face	 to	 face	 with	 Hindal

again,	Humayun	realised	how	much	he	wanted	to	say	–	about	his	guilt,	his	regret	at	having	wounded
him.	But	his	half-brother	wouldn’t	believe	him	and	anyway	nothing	could	alter	the	facts	–	Humayun
loved	 Hamida	 with	 a	 passion	 he’d	 never	 known	 for	 any	 other	 woman.	 If	 he	 had	 his	 time	 again,	 he
would	be	just	as	ruthless	in	his	determination	to	have	her.
All	the	time	Hindal’s	eyes	had	never	left	Humayun’s	face.	‘Well,	what	is	your	answer?	I	must	know
before	I	leave	your	camp	–	assuming	you	are	prepared	to	let	me	go	–	and	I	must	be	gone	before	it
gets	light.	There	are	enough	men	here	who	know	me	and	there	may	be	spies	among	them.	If	word	of
my	presence	reached	Kamran	any	chances	of	my	plan	succeeding	would	be	over	.	.	.	’
‘I	need	time	to	think.	I	will	ask	Zahid	Beg	to	take	you	to	his	tent	and	to	stay	with	you	until	I	come.	It
is	some	three	hours	before	dawn.You	will	have	your	answer	in	two.’
After	Hindal	had	gone,	Humayun	paced	up	and	down,	oblivious	of	the	cold.	Hindal’s	plan	was	bold
and	 brave	 but	 if	 he	 agreed	 to	 it,	 he	 must	 take	 so	 much	 on	 trust.	 How	 many	 times	 had	 his	 faith	 in
members	of	his	own	family	been	betrayed	since	he	had	become	emperor?	.	.	.	Yet	every	inflection	of
Hindal’s	voice,	every	gesture,	had	carried	conviction.	Whatever	his	own	views,	he	could	not	take	the
decision	without	talking	to	Hamida,	who	would	be	wondering	why	he	had	been	gone	so	long.
He	was	right.	When	he	returned	to	their	tent	he	found	that	she	had	risen	and	was	waiting	for	him,
her	dark	hair,	still	dishevelled	by	sleep,	tumbling	around	her	shoulders	and	her	expression	anxious.
‘The	man	who	rode	into	the	camp	during	the	night	–	it	was	Hindal,’	he	said	before	she	could	speak.
‘Hindal?’
‘Yes.	He	offers	us	his	help	in	rescuing	Akbar.	If	I	pretend	to	raise	the	siege	and	march	away,	he	will
ride	to	the	citadel	and	offer	Kamran	an	alliance.	Once	in	Kamran’s	confidence	he	will	seek	a	way	of
smuggling	Akbar	out	of	Kabul.’
‘Could	he	really	bring	back	our	son	to	us	.	.	.	?’
Humayun	could	see	the	hope	beginning	to	take	hold	of	her.‘Well,	perhaps	.	.	.	but	the	problem	is	can
we	trust	Hindal?’
Hamida’s	hopeful	expression	faltered.	‘Hindal	took	a	big	risk	riding	alone	into	your	encampment
in	the	dark.	He	might	have	been	killed.	And	it	would	have	taken	courage	to	face	you	again	too.’
‘True,	but	if	he	is	playing	a	double	game	he	might	have	reckoned	the	possible	rewards	worth	the
risk.	Though	he	swears	he	is	not	in	league	with	Kamran,	this	might	be	a	trick	either	to	induce	me	to
abandon	the	siege	or	just	to	enable	Hindal	and	his	men	to	get	into	Kabul	to	join	Kamran.’	The	only
sound	was	of	the	wind	beating	against	the	hide	walls	of	the	tent	as	Humayun	and	Hamida	looked	at
one	another.	‘If	I	make	the	wrong	decision,	Kamran’s	position	will	be	strengthened	and	our	chances
of	defeating	him	and	regaining	our	son	will	fade,’	Humayun	said	at	last.
Hamida	 pushed	 her	 hair	 back	 from	 her	 face	 with	 a	 weary	 gesture.	 ‘You	 are	 right	 to	 be	 cautious.
After	all,	why	should	Hindal	want	to	help	us?’
‘Exactly	what	I	asked.	He	says	that	by	threatening	a	child,	Kamran	has	shamed	our	family	.	.	.	’
‘Does	family	honour	really	mean	so	much	to	him?’
‘Perhaps	it	does.	But	then	he	told	me	of	another,	perhaps	more	potent	reason.	It	is	you,	not	me,	he
wishes	to	help.	He	knows	that	you	are	suffering	and	wants	to	end	your	pain	.	.	.	’
As	she	took	in	the	implication	of	Humayun’s	words,	Hamida	coloured	and	looked	down.	She	and
Humayun	 had	 never	 spoken	 openly	 of	 Hindal’s	 feelings	 for	 her	 but	 of	 course	 she	 knew.	 For	 a	 few
moments	she	paced	about,	just	as	Humayun	had	done	in	the	cold	night	air,	but	then	she	turned	to	him,
her	face	resolute.	‘I	believe	Hindal	is	sincere.	After	all,	he	has	no	reason	to	love	Kamran	who	held
him	captive	.	.	.	We	should	trust	him.	If	he	betrays	us	he	would	be	as	guilty	as	Kamran	of	exploiting
our	 fears	 for	 the	 life	 of	 our	 child.	 I	 believe	 he	 is	 too	 honourable	 for	 that.	 Please,	 Humayun,	 let	 us

seize	this	chance.’
Humayun	took	her	in	his	arms	and	held	her	close	against	him,	breathing	in	the	familiar	sandalwood
scent	 of	 her.	 He	 must	 not	 be	 swayed	 either	 by	 his	 love	 for	 her	 or	 by	 her	 eagerness	 to	 believe	 in
Hindal.	This	was	one	of	the	most	important	decisions	he	would	ever	make.	But	as	he	went	over	and
over	the	arguments	in	his	mind,	something	deeper,	more	instinctive	than	logic	told	him	Hamida	was
right	–	Hindal	meant	what	he	said	and	they	should	trust	him.	That	didn’t	mean	Hindal	would	succeed.
His	strategy	was	a	dangerous	one,	but	if	everyone	played	their	part	it	might,	just	might,	work.
‘Very	well,’	Humayun	said	at	last.	‘I	will	tell	Hindal	we	accept	his	offer	–	that	you	are	placing	the
life	of	your	child	in	his	hands.’
‘Tell	him	to	bring	Maham	Anga	and	her	son	too.	They	would	be	in	terrible	danger	once	Kamran
found	Akbar	gone.’
Humayun	nodded.	‘There	are	many	things	I	must	discuss	with	him	–	like	how	far	I	should	take	the
army	away	from	Kabul.	He	must	know	where	to	find	us	when	the	moment	comes.’	He	bent	and	kissed
her.	‘Hamida,	tell	no	one	of	this.	If	this	plan	is	to	work,	our	men	must	truly	believe	we	are	abandoning
Kabul	to	Kamran.’
As	Humayun	stepped	once	more	into	the	night,	some	words	from	his	father ’s	memoirs	came	into
his	mind.
Caution	is	a	fine	and	worthy	thing	in	any	monarch,	but	a	truly	great	ruler	must	also	know	when	to
take	risks.

Chapter	19
Riders	in	the	Snow
The	 winter	 sun	 was	 already	 low	 on	 the	 horizon	 when	 Humayun,	 well	 swathed	 in	 a	 sheepskin-lined
coat	against	the	bite	of	the	cold	wind	blowing	down	the	steep	pass	he	and	his	army	were	descending
on	their	march	away	from	Kabul,	saw	Ahmed	Khan	ride	towards	him.
‘Majesty,	my	scouts	have	located	a	place	just	four	miles	ahead	where	we	can	camp.	It’s	in	the	lee	of
a	high	ridge	that	will	protect	us	from	the	prevailing	winds,	and	from	the	top	of	the	ridge	our	sentries
will	have	good	warning	of	anyone	approaching.’
‘Excellent,	Ahmed	Khan.’
Humayun	watched	his	chief	scout	ride	off	ahead	of	the	column	again.	He	had	not	confided	in	any	of
his	 commanders	 about	 the	 reasons	 for	 his	 sudden	 withdrawal	 from	 Kabul,	 not	 because	 he	 doubted
their	loyalty	but	because	even	a	stray	remark	by	one	of	them	might	betray	everything.	Instead,	he	had
told	 them	 he	 was	 losing	 patience	 with	 the	 siege	 –	 that	 he	 intended	 to	 ride	 east	 to	 the	 mountains	 of
Bajaur	where	there	were	other,	lesser	fortresses	garrisoned	by	Kamran’s	men	to	capture	and	where	he
hoped	 to	 recruit	 more	 men.	 When	 the	 snows	 finally	 melted,	 he	 would	 return	 to	 Kabul	 to	 renew	 his
siege.
Zahid	 Beg,	 Ahmed	 Khan	 and	 Nadim	 Khwaja	 had	 looked	 astounded.	 If	 Zahid	 Beg	 had	 wondered
whether	Humayun’s	decision	was	connected	with	Hindal’s	secret	nocturnal	visit,	he’d	not	shown	it	but,
like	the	others,	immediately	set	about	the	cumbersome	business	of	preparing	to	strike	camp.	Only	in
Bairam	 Khan’s	 keen-eyed	 gaze	 had	 Humayun	 thought	 he	 detected	 a	 hint	 of	 speculation	 as	 to	 his
motives	but,	like	the	others,	the	Persian	had	said	nothing.	Humayun	had	told	the	truth	to	Gulbadan.	As
Hindal’s	 sister	 it	 was	 her	 right	 to	 know.	 Just	 like	 Hamida,	 she	 had	 been	 certain	 Hindal’s	 offer	 was
genuine.
Suddenly	behind	him	Humayun	heard	shouting	and	distant	cries	from	the	rear	of	his	column.	This
narrow	winding	pass	with	its	precipitous	drops	on	one	side	down	to	a	frozen	river	would	make	an
ideal	ambush	spot.	Humayun	turned	in	his	saddle	but	could	not	see	round	the	zigzag	bends	to	where
the	noise	was	coming	from.What	he	could	see	was	that	some	of	his	men	were	already	turning	their
horses	 to	 head	 back	 towards	 the	 rearguard.	 At	 once	 the	 fear	 that	 was	 never	 far	 from	 his	 thoughts
returned.	 Surely	 Hindal	 had	 not	 betrayed	 him	 and	 brought	 Kamran	 and	 his	 men	 down	 on	 him?	 He
hadn’t	 been	 such	 a	 fool	 as	 to	 be	 deceived	 again	 by	 one	 of	 his	 half-brothers,	 had	 he?	 Humayun
wrenched	 his	 black	 horse	 round	 and	 followed	 by	 his	 bodyguard	 pushed	 his	 way	 back	 up	 the	 pass
through	the	mass	of	his	troops.
Even	when	he	had	rounded	the	first	bend	he	could	still	see	nothing,	but	the	commotion	to	the	rear
was	louder	and	increasing.	Then,	as	heart	pounding	he	turned	the	second	corner,	he	saw	the	cause.	It
was	not,	God	be	praised,	an	ambush.Two	bullock	carts	were	stuck	across	the	narrow	track.	One	had
slewed	around	entirely.	Its	back	wheels	were	hanging	out	over	nothingness,	while	some	of	his	men
were	 hauling	 at	 the	 bullocks’	 heads,	 grabbing	 at	 the	 heavy	 wooden	 yokes	 and	 putting	 their	 own
shoulders	to	the	front	wheels	to	drag	the	cart	back	on	to	solid	ground.

But	the	greater	problem	was	with	the	second	cart	which	seemed	to	have	been	the	originator	of	the
accident.	 At	 least	 half	 of	 its	 bullock	 team	 had	 gone	 over	 the	 edge.	 Looking	 down	 into	 the	 gorge,
Humayun	could	see	the	bodies	of	three	of	them	lying	among	the	sharp,	jumbled	rocks	of	the	frozen
riverbed,	 the	 blood	 oozing	 from	 them	 colouring	 the	 surrounding	 snow	 red.	 Another	 bullock	 was
dangling,	 hooves	 flailing	 from	 the	 traces,	 over	 the	 drop	 and	 two	 of	 the	 drivers	 were	 leaning	 out,
pulling	 at	 the	 harness	 in	 a	 futile	 attempt	 to	 recover	 it.	 Others	 were	 trying	 to	 stop	 the	 cart	 being
dragged	over	the	side	by	frantically	piling	rocks	in	front	of	its	wheels.	As	Humayun	watched,	one	of
the	two	drivers	slipped	on	the	ice	and	overbalancing	plunged	headfirst	from	the	pass.	His	body	struck
the	rocky	side	of	the	gorge	twice	before	hitting	the	ground	by	that	of	one	of	the	oxen.
‘Cut	 the	 traces.	 Let	 the	 bullock	 fall,’	 shouted	 Humayun.	 ‘It’s	 not	 worth	 losing	 more	 lives.	 Let	 the
cart	go	too	if	you	have	to.’
Swiftly,	a	large,	red-turbaned	man	drew	a	long	dagger	from	his	belt	and	ran	over	to	the	stricken
bullock.	Within	less	than	two	minutes,	he	had	cut	through	the	leather	traces	and	the	bullock,	bellowing
and	kicking	wildly,	had	crashed	to	the	rocks	with	a	sickening	thud.	The	cart,	which	Humayun	now	saw
contained	several	large	copper	cauldrons	and	other	cooking	equipment,	had	stayed	on	the	path.	Good,
thought	 Humayun;	 his	 army	 needed	 hot	 food	 in	 this	 weather.	 Eventually,	 too,	 the	 men	 pushing	 and
straining	 at	 the	 other	 cart,	 hot	 breath	 rising	 in	 the	 winter	 air,	 were	 succeeding	 in	 getting	 its	 rear
wheels	 on	 to	 the	 track	 again	 by	 dint	 of	 lightening	 its	 load	 of	 tents	 and	 piling	 them	 on	 to	 the	 icy
ground.
Humayun	sighed	with	relief.	It	could	have	been	much	worse.	He	could	have	lost	more	men	or	some
of	 his	 few	 precious	 baggage	 elephants.	 It	 was	 time	 he	 and	 his	 men	 stopped	 and	 he	 awaited
developments,	evidence	one	way	or	the	other	of	Hindal’s	sincerity.	Tonight,	he	would	announce	to	his
men	that,	having	travelled	over	forty	miles	from	Kabul	and	found	a	good	site,	they	would	make	camp
for	some	days	to	rest	and	overhaul	their	weapons	and	equipment.	The	men	should	be	glad	of	it,	even
though	their	general	mood	was	sombre,	sullen	even.	Some	from	the	clans	around	Kabul	had	already
drifted	away,	convinced	their	hopes	of	booty	were	gone,	but	Humayun	had	been	prepared	for	that.	If
Hindal’s	 plan	 succeeded	 it	 wouldn’t	 be	 long	 before	 he	 returned	 to	 Kabul	 to	 unleash	 his	 full	 might
against	the	citadel.	As	his	cannon	again	crashed	and	boomed,	those	who	had	deserted	would	be	quick
to	return	.	.	.
He	had	agreed	with	Hindal	in	which	direction	he	would	take	his	men	and	roughly	how	far.	Once
they	had	set	up	camp	he	would	order	Ahmed	Khan	to	ensure	his	scouts	kept	watch	day	and	night.	They
would	 believe	 they	 were	 watching	 for	 signs	 of	 pursuit	 by	 Kamran’s	 forces.	 Of	 course,	 if	 Hindal’s
plan	failed,	or	if	Hindal	betrayed	him,	that	could	still	be	the	case	.	.	.

Humayun	 moved	 restlessly	 beneath	 the	 thick	 pile	 of	 furs	 and	 sheepskins,	 his	 thoughts	 and	 anxieties
making	sleep	impossible.	‘We	can	trust	Hindal,	can’t	we?’	he	asked.	‘It’s	been	more	than	a	month	and
we’ve	heard	nothing.’
Hamida	was	tossing	and	turning	equally	sleepless	at	his	side.	‘I	really	do	believe	so.	Everything	my
father	 said	 about	 him	 when	 he	 served	 as	 his	 counsellor	 makes	 me	 think	 it.	 So	 too	 does	 Gulbadan’s
love	and	regard	for	her	brother.	My	worry	is	not	that	he	will	betray	us	but	that	he	will	be	betrayed	or
somehow	fail	to	rescue	Akbar.	What	will	Kamran	do	then?	He	wouldn’t	kill	Akbar,	would	he	.	.	.	?’

It	was	the	first	time	Hamida	had	asked	that	question.	‘No,’	he	said	with	more	confidence	than	he	felt.
‘He	 will	 be	 even	 more	 convinced	 of	 Akbar ’s	 value	 as	 a	 hostage	 –	 though	 it	 might	 go	 hard	 with
Hindal.’
‘You	 are	 right,’	 Hamida	 said	 after	 a	 moment.	 ‘And	 there’s	 no	 reason	 to	 think	 anything	 has	 gone
wrong	yet.	Hindal	will	need	time	to	ingratiate	himself	sufficiently	with	Kamran	to	gain	a	position	of
trust	so	he	can	rescue	our	son.	We	must	be	patient.’
‘Patience	and	uncertainty	have	always	come	hard	to	me.	I	long	for	an	end	to	this	gnawing	suspense
so	I	can	compose	myself	to	the	outcome	and	act.’
‘Uncertainty	and	anxiety	are	part	of	all	mortal	lives.	After	all,	the	spotted	fever	could	carry	us	off	at
any	 moment,	 destroying	 all	 our	 hopes	 and	 dreams,	 but	 we	 don’t	 think	 about	 it	 every	 day.	 We	 must
learn	to	accept	that	sometimes	events	are	beyond	our	control.’
‘I	know,	but	as	a	leader	as	well	as	Akbar ’s	father	I	have	a	duty	to	make	things	turn	out	as	I	would
wish	and	I	cannot	influence	what	is	happening	in	Kabul	however	much	I	worry.’
‘Then	 you	 must	 try	 not	 to	 worry	 .	 .	 .	 it	 does	 no	 good.	 We	 must	 have	 faith.’	 Hamida	 enfolded
Humayun	in	her	arms	and	at	last,	clinging	to	each	other	in	their	cocoon	of	furs,	they	slept.
This	 was	 not	 the	 last	 such	 conversation	 Humayun	 had	 with	 Hamida	 during	 the	 long	 nights	 when
sleep	 eluded	 them.	 Nevertheless,	 sometimes	 he	 could	 not	 restrain	 himself	 from	 leaving	 his	 tent	 to
stare	into	the	cold	stars	to	see	if	they	held	any	message	for	him,	but	he	found	no	response.	Even	when
he	summoned	old	Sharaf,	whose	thin	mottled	hands	protruded	like	gnarled	claws	from	the	sleeves	of
his	sheepskin	coat,	he	could	find	none.
As	the	days	passed	little	moved	over	the	frozen	landscape	except	trotting	foxes	and	a	few	rabbits
that	 Humayun’s	 men	 hunted	 for	 the	 pot.	 Humayun	 tried	 to	 lose	 himself	 in	 physical	 activity.	 Bairam
Khan	 taught	 him	 some	 useful	 tricks	 of	 Persian	 swordplay	 including	 how,	 by	 catching	 the	 tip	 of	 his
blade	 in	 his	 opponent’s	 hand	 guard,	 he	 could	 twist	 his	 enemy’s	 wrist	 and	 force	 him	 to	 drop	 his
weapon.	He	also	practised	his	archery,	firing	at	straw	targets	set	up	on	poles	driven	into	the	snowy
ground.	It	was	good	to	find	his	eye	as	sharp	and	his	hand	as	steady	as	ever,	though	it	made	him	long
for	the	real	action	that	could	only	follow	news	from	Hindal.	But	at	last,	one	afternoon	while	Humayun
was	out	hawking,	watching	his	bird	arcing	in	light	blue	skies	that	hinted	at	the	approach	of	spring,	he
saw	Ahmed	Khan	galloping	towards	him	from	the	direction	of	the	ridge.
‘Majesty,	my	men	have	seen	riders	approaching.’
‘How	many?’
‘Just	a	few,	mostly	mounted	on	mules	–	probably	a	small	caravan	of	merchants.	They	are	still	about
two	miles	away	but	seem	to	be	heading	in	this	direction.’
‘Take	me	to	them.’
Humayun’s	heart	was	thumping	as,	ten	minutes	later,	he	galloped	out	at	Ahmed	Khan’s	side.	It	was
probably	 nothing	 –	 just	 a	 few	 merchants	 as	 Ahmed	 Khan	 had	 said	 –	 yet	 he	 couldn’t	 prevent	 a	 wild
hope	 from	 welling	 up	 inside	 him.	 He	 strained	 his	 eyes	 into	 the	 hazy	 far	 distance,	 impatient	 for	 any
sign	of	movement	out	there	on	the	drear,	seemingly	empty	white	landscape.	At	first	there	was	nothing
but	 then	 he	 gasped.What	 looked	 like	 a	 string	 of	 black	 dots	 was	 moving	 slowly	 but	 unmistakably
towards	them	from	the	west	–	the	direction	of	Kabul.
Bending	low	over	its	neck,	Humayun	urged	his	horse	on	and	was	soon	outstripping	Ahmed	Khan.
All	the	time	the	dots	were	becoming	bigger	and	more	distinct	–	starting	to	take	substance.	As	he	drew
yet	closer	–	only	some	four	or	five	hundred	yards	away	now	–	he	thought	he	could	make	out	about
eight	or	nine	riders;	a	small	party	to	be	out	alone	in	such	uncertain	times.
They	had	halted	and	the	foremost	had	risen	in	his	stirrups	and,	shading	his	eyes	with	one	hand,	was

looking	in	his	direction.	Even	from	this	distance,	there	seemed	something	achingly	familiar	about	that
large	 figure	 .	 .	 .	 He	 wasn’t	 deceiving	 himself,	 was	 he?	 It	 could	 be	 Hindal,	 couldn’t	 it?	 Humayun
wheeled	his	own	mount	to	a	halt	as	he	too	stared	intently	ahead.	Moments	later	Ahmed	Khan	and	his
guards	came	galloping	up,	their	horses’	hooves	flinging	up	puffs	of	powdery	snow.
‘Shall	I	send	men	to	find	out	who	they	are,	Majesty?’	asked	Ahmed	Khan.
‘No	.	.	.	I	will	go	.	.	.	Stay	here,	all	of	you!’	Ignoring	Ahmed	Khan’s	protests,	Humayun	kicked	his
horse	on.	He	must	be	first	to	know	his	son’s	fate	if	the	riders	carried	that	news	and	he	could	wait	no
longer.	As	he	galloped	over	the	frozen	ground,	the	sound	of	hooves	echoing	in	his	ears,	he	saw	that
the	leading	rider	was	still	watching	him,	motionless.	Looking	beyond	him,	Humayun	discovered	that
most	 of	 the	 rest	 of	 the	 group	 –	 six	 men	 and	 a	 slightly	 smaller	 figure	 –	 a	 woman	 by	 the	 long	 plait
hanging	 down	 from	 beneath	 a	 black	 shaggy	 lamb’s	 wool	 hat	 –	 were	 on	 mules.	 The	 woman	 was
holding	the	reins	of	another	mule.	Drawing	nearer	he	made	out	that	strapped	to	its	back	was	a	wicker
basket	 in	 which	 he	 thought	 he	 saw	 two	 rolls	 of	 bedding	 –	 or	 could	 it	 be	 children,	 so	 wrapped	 in
sheepskins	they	looked	almost	spherical?
Humayun	 was	 just	 fifty	 yards	 away	 now.	 For	 a	 moment,	 he	 felt	 afraid	 to	 go	 closer	 in	 case	 the
people	 before	 him	 on	 the	 snowy	 landscape	 were	 just	 an	 illusion,	 conjured	 by	 his	 own	 hopes	 and
desires.	 Reining	 in	 and	 not	 daring	 to	 take	 his	 eyes	 from	 them,	 Humayun	 slid	 from	 his	 saddle	 and
made	his	way	on	foot	over	the	last	few	yards,	slowly	at	first	but	then	breaking	into	a	run,	feet	slipping
and	sliding.
The	leading	rider,	gazing	towards	him	so	intently,	was	indeed	Hindal	shrouded	in	a	thick	fur	cloak.
Scarcely	 aware	 of	 what	 he	 was	 doing	 and	 with	 tears	 of	 joy	 already	 streaming	 down	 his	 face,
Humayun	 ran	 past	 Hindal	 towards	 the	 mule	 carrying	 the	 bundles.	 He	 heard	 Maham	 Anga’s	 cry	 of
‘Majesty!’	but	then	he	saw	the	bundles	were	indeed	children	and	had	thoughts	only	for	Akbar,	sitting
calmly	next	to	Adham	Khan,	his	milk-brother.	As	Humayun	leaned	over	him,	Akbar	gazed	at	him	with
friendly	interest	from	within	his	nest	of	sheepskins.	In	the	nearly	fourteen	months	since	Kamran	had
taken	him	he	had	changed	so	much,	but	he	was	still	unmistakably	Akbar.	As	Adham	Khan	began	to
wail,	Humayun	gently	lifted	Akbar	from	the	basket	and	held	him	close	against	him,	breathing	in	the
warm	scent	of	him.
‘My	son,’	he	whispered,	‘my	son.’
An	hour	later,	Humayun	rode	at	the	head	of	the	party	back	into	the	camp.	Reaching	the	women’s
tents,	he	dismounted	then	carefully	took	Akbar	from	his	basket.	Lulled	by	the	resumed	motion	of	the
mule,	the	child	was	fast	asleep.	With	Maham	Anga	by	his	side,	Humayun	entered	Hamida’s	tent.	She
had	been	reading	some	of	her	beloved	poetry	but	the	volume	had	fallen	from	her	hands	and	she	too
was	sleeping,	lying	back	against	some	red	and	gold	velvet	cushions.	How	young	she	looked	with	her
silken	hair	falling	about	her	and	her	breast	gently	rising	and	falling.
‘Hamida,’	he	whispered,	‘Hamida	.	.	.	I	have	something	for	you	–	a	gift	.	.	.	’
As	her	eyes	opened	and	she	saw	Akbar,	joy	such	as	he	had	never	witnessed	before	lit	up	her	face.
But	 as	 Humayun	 placed	 him	 in	 her	 arms,	 Akbar	 awoke.	 Looking	 up	 at	 Hamida,	 he	 released	 a
bewildered	yell	and	began	struggling	to	get	free.	Maham	Anga	darted	forward,	and	as	soon	as	he	saw
her	Akbar ’s	distress	vanished.	Smilingly	he	stretched	out	his	chubby	arms	to	his	wet-nurse.

All	 around	 him,	 Humayun’s	 officers	 were	 reclining	 against	 the	 great	 bolsters	 carefully	 arranged
around	 his	 scarlet	 command	 tent,	 amid	 the	 debris	 of	 the	 celebration	 feast.	 Earlier	 that	 afternoon	 he
had	called	an	assembly	of	all	his	men	and	announced	the	rescue	of	Akbar.
‘My	 loyal	 men	 –	 I	 present	 to	 you	 my	 son,	 the	 symbol	 of	 our	 future,	 safely	 returned	 to	 me	 .	 .	 .	 ’
Standing	on	a	makeshift	wooden	dais	in	the	centre	of	his	camp,	Humayun	had	lifted	Akbar	high	above
his	head.	A	great	cheer	accompanied	by	the	clashing	of	swords	on	shields	had	thundered	around	him.
Akbar	had	still	been	blinking	in	surprise	at	the	uproar	as	Humayun	had	handed	him	back	to	Maham
Anga,	but	he	hadn’t	cried.	It	was	a	good	omen.	Humayun	had	raised	his	hands	to	call	for	calm.
‘It	 is	 time	 to	 return	 to	 Kabul	 to	 finish	 what	 we	 started	 and	 eject	 the	 impostor	 who	 hides	 behind
innocent	 children.	 Our	 cause	 is	 just	 and	 God	 is	 with	 us.	 Tonight	 we	 feast	 but	 our	 feasting	 will	 be
nothing	compared	to	our	celebrations	once	Kabul	is	ours.	Tomorrow	at	dawn	we	ride	for	the	city.’
The	 cooks	 had	 laboured	 hard	 on	 their	 preparations,	 spitting	 and	 roasting	 meat	 over	 great	 fires
whose	smoke	billowed	into	the	sky.	Now	that	his	son	was	safe,	Humayun	didn’t	care	from	how	many
miles	his	camp	was	visible.
Some	of	his	commanders	were	starting	to	sing	–	heroic	songs	of	deeds	on	the	battlefield,	bawdy
songs	of	even	greater	feats	in	the	haram.	Looking	around	he	saw	Zahid	Beg	swaying	back	and	forth,
skull-like	face	glowing	with	the	effects	of	the	strong	red	wine	of	Ghazni	for	which	the	kingdom	of
Kabul	was	famous	and	which	his	own	father	Babur	had	enjoyed	so	much.	Even	Kasim,	normally	so
quiet	 and	 reticent,	 was	 joining	 in	 the	 singing	 from	 the	 corner	 of	 the	 tent	 where	 he	 had	 found	 a
comfortable	place	to	rest	his	old	bones.
Humayun	had	lost	no	time	in	telling	his	inner	circle,	his	ichkis,	that	the	abandonment	of	the	siege
had	 been	 only	 a	 ruse.	 Most	 had	 looked	 genuinely	 astonished.	 Only	 Bairam	 Khan	 had	 shown	 little
surprise	and	his	intense	indigo	eyes	had	seemed	knowing	as	gravely	he	had	congratulated	Humayun
on	the	return	of	his	son,	making	Humayun	doubly	certain	he	had	known	all	along.	More	than	ever	he
was	glad	to	have	the	Persian	at	his	side.
Humayun	 glanced	 at	 Hindal	 sitting	 close	 beside	 him.	 Unlike	 the	 rest	 of	 the	 revellers,	 he	 had	 said
little	 and	 looked	 withdrawn	 and	 uncomfortable	 to	 be	 seated	 with	 Humayun	 and	 his	 officers.	 Since
their	return	to	the	camp	the	previous	evening,	Humayun	had	seen	little	of	his	half-brother.	Instead,	in
his	 relief	 to	 be	 reunited	 with	 his	 son,	 he’d	 spent	 most	 of	 his	 time	 with	 Hamida	 and	 Akbar.	 To
Hamida’s	sorrow,	their	son	was	still	clinging	to	Maham	Anga.	Every	time	Hamida	tried	to	pick	him
up,	he	struggled	and	screamed.	But	that	would	pass,	Humayun	had	comforted	Hamida,	who	was	torn
between	 relief	 and	 exultation	 at	 her	 son’s	 safe	 return,	 wonderment	 at	 how	 much	 he	 had	 grown	 and
grief	that	in	the	months	they	had	been	apart	she	had	become	a	stranger	to	him.	At	least	his	vigorous
wriggling	 showed	 that	 despite	 his	 traumatic	 experiences	 he	 was	 in	 robust	 good	 health,	 Hamida	 had
said,	smiling	through	her	tears.Then	she	had	added,‘Thank	Hindal	for	me,	won’t	you.’
Looking	again	at	Hindal’s	half-averted	face,	Humayun	guessed	this	might	be	a	harder	task	than	she
had	realised.
‘Hindal	 .	 .	 .	 ’	 He	 waited	 until	 he	 had	 his	 half-brother ’s	 full	 attention	 then	 continued,	 lowering	 his
voice	so	that	they	would	not	be	overheard.	‘I	know	what	you	did	was	not	for	me,	but	for	Hamida.	She
asked	me	to	thank	you.’
‘Tell	her	there	is	no	need.	It	was	a	matter	of	family	honour	.	.	.’
‘You	 may	 not	 wish	 to	 hear	 this,	 but	 I	 too	 will	 be	 for	 ever	 in	 your	 debt.	 Your	 reasons	 for	 your
actions	don’t	absolve	me	of	my	obligation	to	you.’
Hindal	gave	a	slight	shrug	but	said	nothing.
‘Tell	me,	did	your	plan	go	as	you	expected?	Hamida	too	is	anxious	to	know	what	happened	.	.	.	’

For	the	first	time	a	faint	smile	lightened	Hindal’s	face.	‘It	went	better	than	I’d	dared	to	hope.	Several
days	after	my	scouts	reported	your	withdrawal	from	Kabul,	I	rode	down	from	the	mountains	with	my
men	and	sent	messengers	to	the	citadel	to	tell	Kamran	I	was	ready	to	pledge	my	support	to	him	as	the
true	head	of	our	family.	As	I’d	thought,	conceited	and	arrogant	as	he	is	and	already	euphoric	at	your
departure,	he	ordered	me	to	be	admitted.	He	even	threw	a	feast	in	celebration	and	gave	me	gifts	.	.	.	’
‘He	really	had	no	suspicions?’
‘None.	 Believing	 he	 had	 defeated	 you,	 his	 confidence	 blinded	 him.	 Even	 before	 I’d	 arrived,	 he’d
ordered	the	gates	of	both	the	town	and	the	citadel	to	be	kept	open	once	more	in	the	hours	of	daylight.
I’d	only	been	there	about	a	week	when	he	began	to	speak	about	going	south	on	a	hunting	expedition	in
search	 of	 wolves	 and	 the	 great-horned	 sheep	 forced	 down	 from	 the	 mountains	 by	 hunger	 and	 the
winter	cold.	I	encouraged	him	–	even	offered	to	go	with	him.	But,	as	I	suspected	and	hoped	he	would,
he	ordered	me	to	stay	behind.	He’d	already	found	tasks	for	me	like	drilling	some	of	his	guards.	He
joked	 that	 he’d	 be	 leaving	 plenty	 of	 loyal	 officers	 behind	 just	 in	 case	 I’d	 any	 thoughts	 of	 grabbing
Kabul	for	myself.
‘After	 Kamran	 left,	 I	 just	 carried	 out	 my	 orders,	 careful	 to	 do	 nothing	 to	 excite	 comment.	 I	 also
wanted	to	be	sure	that	he	had	really	gone	for	a	few	days.Then,	towards	late	afternoon	on	the	fourth
day	 –	 with	 no	 sign	 of	 Kamran	 returning	 that	 night	 –	 I	 made	 my	 move.	 D’you	 remember	 from	 our
boyhood	that	small	courtyard	over	on	the	eastern	side	of	the	citadel	with	along	one	side	of	it	a	series
of	vaulted	rooms	where	grain	and	wine	were	stored?’
Humayun	 nodded.	 Suddenly,	 the	 dusty	 little	 courtyard	 with	 its	 row	 of	 storerooms	 that	 he	 and	 his
brothers	had	enjoyed	exploring,	trying	to	drive	their	dagger	tips	into	the	casks	so	they	could	taste	the
wine,	was	so	vivid	in	his	mind	he	could	almost	smell	the	mingled	aromas	of	wine	and	grain.
‘Well,	 I	 had	 found	 out	 that	 Kamran	 had	 modified	 some	 of	 those	 storerooms	 to	 make	 apartments
where	Akbar,	together	with	Maham	Anga	and	her	son,	was	being	held	under	guard.	I	made	my	way
there	 quietly	 with	 four	 of	 my	 most	 loyal	 men.	 When	 we	 reached	 the	 courtyard,	 my	 men	 concealed
themselves	 behind	 some	 large	 grain	 storage	 jars.	 Through	 the	 spy-hole	 that	 had	 been	 made	 in	 the
door,	I	told	the	two	guards	on	duty	inside	that	as	the	boy’s	uncle,	I	wished	to	visit	him.	Recognising
me,	 they	 opened	 the	 door.As	 I	 engaged	 them	 in	 conversation,	 my	 men	 rushed	 out,	 overcame	 them,
then	bound	and	gagged	them.
‘My	 greatest	 difficulty	 was	 with	 Maham	 Anga	 –	 she	 tried	 to	 draw	 a	 dagger	 on	 me	 and	 started
screaming.	I	easily	took	the	weapon	from	her	–	it	was	only	later	that	she	told	me	it	was	poisoned	–	but
it	was	far	harder	to	quieten	her	shrieks.	I	had	to	place	my	hand	over	her	mouth	and	tell	her	again	and
again	that	I	meant	Akbar	no	harm	.	.	.	that	I	had	come	with	your	knowledge	and	approval	to	rescue
them	all.
‘Finally	she	calmed	down,	but	they	were	anxious	minutes.	Though	we	were	in	a	remote	part	of	the
citadel,	I	knew	that	at	any	moment	we	might	easily	be	discovered.	Luckily,	no	one	came,	but	by	now
time	was	running	out	–	I	knew	that	in	another	half-hour,	the	gates	of	the	citadel	would	be	closed	for
the	 night.	 We	 had	 to	 get	 out	 quickly	 and	 in	 a	 way	 that	 would	 not	 attract	 attention.	 I’d	 noticed	 that
towards	dusk	many	of	the	traders	who	came	each	day	to	transact	business	in	the	citadel	–	there	was
much	 reprovisioning	 to	 be	 done	 now	 the	 siege	 was	 over	 –	 usually	 left	 to	 return	 to	 the	 city.	 I’d
therefore	 ordered	 my	 men	 to	 bring	 robes	 and	 turbans	 so	 that	 all	 of	 us	 –	 including	 Maham	 Anga	 –
could	 disguise	 ourselves	 as	 merchants.	 We	 had	 also	 brought	 thick	 sheepskins	 in	 which	 to	 wrap	 the
boys	to	conceal	them	and	a	phial	of	rosewater	mixed	with	opium	to	make	them	drowsy	so	they	didn’t
cry	out.	I	ordered	Maham	Anga	to	give	a	little	to	each	child.	When	she	hesitated,	I	drank	some	myself
to	prove	to	her	it	wasn’t	poison.

‘The	opium	did	its	work	quickly	and	the	children	were	docile	as	we	wrapped	the	sheepskins	around
them.	 Then,	 leaving	 the	 guards	 securely	 locked	 in	 the	 storeroom	 to	 conceal	 Akbar ’s	 disappearance
for	as	long	as	possible,	and	after	quickly	pulling	on	our	traders’	garb,	we	hurried	through	the	citadel
towards	the	gates	to	join	the	throng	of	people	and	beasts	pouring	down	the	ramp.	No	one	challenged
us.	We	made	our	way	with	the	rest	towards	the	town	where,	just	outside	the	gates,	more	of	my	men
were	waiting	with	my	horse	and	mules	for	the	rest	of	the	group.	I	hoped	using	mules	would	add	to	the
impression	that	we	were	merchants	not	warriors.	As	darkness	fell,	we	mounted	up	and	headed	north	at
first	to	conceal	our	true	direction,	just	in	case	we	were	followed	or	spotted	as	we	left	the	city.	After
riding	through	the	freezing	cold	of	the	night,	towards	dawn	we	circled	round	to	the	east	and	with	the
sun	rising	in	our	faces	began	our	journey	to	find	you.’
As	 Hindal	 had	 been	 telling	 his	 story,	 his	 eyes	 had	 shone	 with	 an	 almost	 boyish	 excitement	 and
exhilaration	at	succeeding	in	a	difficult	and	dangerous	task.	Now	that	he	had	finished,	Humayun	felt	a
new	and	profound	respect	for	his	youngest	half-brother	–	for	his	resourcefulness	and	coolness,	his
meticulous	planning.	Above	all,	what	impressed	him	was	how	completely	Hindal	understood	Kamran,
exploiting	his	vanity	to	slip	in	under	his	defences.	Hadn’t	Babur	always	cautioned	them,	even	as	boys,
to	know	their	enemy?	Hindal	had	plainly	listened,	but	how	well	had	he	himself	really	understood	the
need	 to	 empathise	 with	 others	 –	 not	 just	 enemies	 but	 friends	 –	 even	 family?	 Had	 he	 always	 striven
enough	to	understand	Hindal	and	to	see	things	from	his	perspective?
For	a	brief	time	the	two	of	them	had	become	close.	Perhaps	they	might	yet	be	so	again	.	.	.	The	red
wine	he	had	drunk	made	his	next	words	easier	to	say.	‘Hindal,	you	spoke	just	now	of	our	boyhood	in
Kabul.	We	share	so	much,	you	and	I,	not	just	our	blood	and	our	heritage	but	so	much	of	our	past.	My
mother	 loved	 you	 as	 her	 own.	 Of	 all	 my	 half-brothers,	 you	 are	 the	 one	 I	 feel	 closest	 to	 and	 would
wish	to	make	my	friend.	I	know	that	unwittingly	–	selfishly	even	–	I	injured	you.	For	that	I	am	truly
sorry	and	ask	your	forgiveness	.	.	.	’	‘Humayun	.	.	.	’
But	 determined	 not	 to	 let	 Hindal	 speak	 until	 he	 had	 finished,	 Humayun	 pressed	 on.	 ‘Can’t	 we	 put
our	past	troubles	behind	us?	Be	my	ally	again	and	ride	by	my	side	to	capture	Kabul.	The	future	holds
so	much	for	us	if	we	are	ready	to	seize	it	–	one	day	Hindustan	will	be	Moghul	again	and	I	will	give
you	a	position	of	power	and	honour	there,	I	swear	it.	Hindal	.	.	.	won’t	you	forgive	me?	Won’t	you
share	that	destiny	with	me?’
But	 Hindal	 was	 shaking	 his	 dark	 head.	 ‘I	 told	 you	 at	 our	 last	 meeting	 that	 we	 would	 never	 be
reconciled	 and	 it	 was	 the	 truth.	 I’ve	 done	 what	 I	 promised	 and	 that’s	 an	 end	 of	 it.	 Your	 camp	 is	 no
home	 to	 me.	 I’ve	 only	 lingered	 this	 long	 to	 make	 certain	 that	 I	 hadn’t	 been	 followed	 and	 brought
Kamran	down	on	you	–	and	of	course	to	have	some	time	with	my	sister	Gulbadan.’
‘Must	it	be	like	this?’
‘You	still	don’t	understand	me,	do	you?	Like	your	mother	you	are	greedy	for	what	you	want	and	do
not	like	to	be	denied.	She	took	me	from	my	own	mother	with	no	concern	for	anyone’s	happiness	but
her	own.	Now	you	want	me	to	forget	what’s	passed	between	us	–	your	unthinking	arrogance	and	utter
selfishness	–	and	to	play	your	loyal	and	loving	brother	again.	I	can’t	do	it.	It	would	be	a	lie	and	I	have
too	much	self-respect.’
‘Hindal	.	.	.	’
‘No,	Humayun.	You	have	your	wife	and	your	son.	Soon	perhaps	you	will	have	a	throne	again.	Isn’t
that	enough	to	satisfy	you?	Tomorrow	at	first	light	I	will	ride	from	here	in	search	of	the	remainder	of
my	men,	whom	I	ordered	to	leave	Kabul	before	Kamran	returned.	Once	I	find	them,	we	will	go	once
more	into	the	mountains.	I	don’t	know	when	–	or	in	what	circumstances	–	you	and	I	will	meet	again.
Perhaps	never	.	.	.	’

Hindal	paused.	It	seemed	to	Humayun	that	there	was	something	more	he	wished	to	say	but	after	a
few	moments	his	half-brother	rose	and	without	looking	back	made	his	way	through	the	feasters	and
out	through	the	tent	flaps	into	the	night.

Chapter	20
Kabul
‘Majesty,	 they’ve	 poisoned	 the	 wells.’	 It	 was	 one	 of	 Ahmed	 Khan’s	 scouts,	 the	 coat	 of	 his	 chestnut
mare	steaming	in	the	cold	as	he	rode	across	the	snowy	ground	up	to	where	Humayun	was	standing	on
the	crest	of	a	ridge	looking	towards	Kabul.	Although	the	snow	was	not	yet	melting,	there’d	been	no
fresh	falls.	That	was	one	reason	why	he	and	his	men	had	made	such	swift	progress	as	they	retraced
their	steps	westward.	Another	was	a	renewed	energy	and	sense	of	purpose.	He	sensed	it	in	his	men	and
felt	it	deep	within	himself.
‘Tell	me	more,’	he	said.
‘We	found	dead	and	dying	wild	animals	around	the	streams	and	wells	nearest	the	citadel	walls.	The
gates	of	the	city	and	the	citadel	are	closed	against	us	and	the	walls	of	both	are	thick	with	defenders.
They	shot	down	one	of	our	men	who	ventured	too	close.’
‘Test	some	of	the	wells	and	springs	further	away.	Feed	the	water	to	some	of	those	flea-bitten	pariah
dogs	that	scavenge	around	the	edges	of	our	camp.	Until	we	find	good	water	we	can	drink	snow	melted
over	our	fires.’
By	 eight	 o’clock	 that	 evening,	 Humayun’s	 camp	 again	 spilled	 over	 the	 plains	 below	 Kabul	 and
hundreds	 of	 camp	 fires	 glowed	 in	 the	 darkness	 as	 his	 men	 prepared	 their	 evening	 meal.	 Kamran’s
troops	 had	 not	 done	 their	 work	 thoroughly.	 Humayun’s	 men	 had	 found	 supplies	 of	 untainted	 water
only	a	mile	from	the	walls	of	Kabul.	Standing	outside	his	command	tent	Humayun	could	see	pinpricks
of	light	high	on	the	battlements	of	the	citadel.Was	Kamran	perhaps	up	there,	watching	and	speculating,
just	 as	 he	 was?	 And	 if	 so,	 what	 was	 going	 through	 his	 mind	 at	 the	 sight	 of	 Humayun’s	 army	 once
more	before	the	gates	of	Kabul?	How	would	Kamran	feel	to	have	been	deceived	as	he	had	so	often
deceived	 others?	 Having	 lost	 his	 hostage,	 how	 did	 he	 think	 he	 could	 overcome	 the	 avenging
Humayun?	Was	he	ruing	his	arrogant	self-confidence	in	unthinkingly	accepting	Hindal	as	a	suppliant
ally,	believing	that	his	natural	superiority	meant	it	must	be	preordained	to	be	so?
Humayun	suddenly	grimaced.	Had	he	himself	been	so	different	from	Kamran	in	expecting,	as	of
right,	 Hindal’s	 unquestioning	 loyalty	 in	 the	 past?	 Perhaps	 not.	 He	 hoped	 that	 Kamran	 was	 sweating
with	worry	and	fear,	but	this	was	no	time	for	playing	out	personal	games	of	revenge.	All	that	mattered
was	the	quickest	path	to	victory	and	that	would	not	be	easy.The	citadel	was	strong	and	well	supplied.
Kamran	and	his	men	would	defend	it	stoutly,	knowing	that	they	could	expect	little	mercy.
In	 need	 of	 her	 calm	 comfort	 and	 pragmatic	 commonsense,	 he	 wished	 he	 had	 Hamida	 at	 his	 side.
However,	 he	 knew	 he	 had	 been	 right	 to	 decide	 that,	 together	 with	 Akbar,	 Gulbadan	 and	 the	 other
women,	she	should	follow	behind	the	main	force,	heavily	protected	by	a	well-armed	escort,	and	then
halt	at	a	safe	distance	from	Kabul.	He	would	not	risk	his	wife	or	his	son	again.	But	as	soon	as	the	city
was	his	own	once	more,	he	could	quickly	call	for	her.	At	last,	after	so	much	hardship	and	heartache
she	 would	 know	 the	 trappings	 of	 a	 queen	 and	 soon,	 he	 vowed	 to	 himself,	 the	 glories	 of	 being	 an
empress.

A	sudden	violent	explosion	just	behind	him	deafened	Humayun	and	a	blast	of	hot	air	threw	him	to	the
ground,	hitting	his	head	a	glancing	blow	on	a	rock	as	he	fell.	His	eyes	and	mouth	were	full	of	dirt	and
snow	 but	 he	 eventually	 managed	 to	 reopen	 his	 eyes.	 Slowly	 he	 realised	 that	 he	 was	 surrounded	 by
shards	of	bronze	while	what	looked	like	slivers	of	fresh	meat	were	dotted	over	the	snowy	ground.	A
kite	 landed	 and	 started	 pecking	 at	 one	 with	 its	 curved	 beak.	 The	 silence	 in	 his	 head	 made	 the	 scene
even	more	nightmarish	and	Humayun	put	his	hands	to	his	ears.	As	he	did	so,	blood	trickled	down	the
fingers	of	his	right	hand	from	a	wound	to	his	right	temple.
Suddenly	there	was	a	crackling	in	his	ears	–	his	hearing	was	returning	.	.	.	He	could	make	out	what
sounded	like	frantic	cheering	from	the	defenders	on	the	wall	of	the	citadel,	together	with	shouts	of
mockery.	Still	dazed	and	struggling	to	reassemble	his	scrambled	thoughts,	Humayun	hauled	himself
to	his	feet	and	looked	around.	Slowly,	he	understood	what	had	happened.	One	of	his	largest	cannon
had	exploded.	It	was	lying	on	its	side	with	one	of	its	gunners	trapped	by	the	legs	beneath	it,	twisting
and	screaming	in	pain.	The	remains	of	at	least	two	other	men	were	scattered	around,	a	severed	leg
here,	an	arm	there,	a	bloody	torso	next	to	the	cannon	and	only	a	yard	from	Humayun’s	foot	a	singed
and	mutilated	head,	its	little	remaining	hair	blowing	in	the	breeze.	The	barrel	of	the	cannon	must	have
cracked,	Humayun	realised.	It	had	been	in	daily	use	since	his	men	had	renewed	their	siege	of	the	city
and	the	citadel	three	weeks	ago.	As	before,	he	had	made	the	citadel	his	main	target	and	his	troops	had
hauled	their	cannon	back	to	their	previous	positions,	protected	by	the	rocky	outcrop	where	the	road	to
the	citadel	curved	round.
‘Majesty,	are	you	all	right?’	Jauhar	appeared,	streaked	with	pale	dust	and	looking	more	ghost	than
man.
‘Just	a	graze	to	my	head.’	As	he	spoke,	a	wave	of	nausea	passed	over	Humayun	and	Jauhar	caught
him	as	he	staggered.
‘We	 will	 get	 you	 to	 the	 hakim,	 Majesty.’	 Jauhar	 half	 carried	 him	 to	 where	 some	 horses	 were
tethered.	As	he	rode	slowly	back	to	the	camp	with	Jauhar	holding	the	reins	of	his	horse	as	well	as	his
own,	the	thoughts	within	Humayun’s	pounding	head	were	bleak.	Even	without	this	latest	setback,	the
truth	was	that	the	siege	was	making	little	progress.	Although	the	aim	of	his	gunners,	sweating	in	the
freezing	 cold	 in	 their	 leather	 jerkins	 as	 they	 rammed	 powder	 and	 shot	 down	 the	 bronze	 barrels	 of
their	 cannon	 and	 placed	 their	 glowing	 tapers	 to	 the	 touch-holes,	 was	 good	 and	 nearly	 every	 shot
raised	billowing	clouds	of	dust	and	shards	of	mud	and	stone	from	their	main	target	–	the	gatehouse
and	 the	 repaired	 and	 reinforced	 walls	 around	 it	 –	 they	 had	 not	 yet	 succeeded	 in	 making	 a	 breach.
Humayun	had	tried	ordering	two	teams	of	gunners	to	fire	to	the	left	of	the	gate	to	test	the	strength	of
the	walls	there,	but	the	difficult	angle	meant	the	only	way	to	fire	accurately	at	that	stretch	was	to	move
the	 cannon	 out	 from	 behind	 the	 outcrop	 where	 an	 archer	 or	 musketeer	 up	 on	 the	 battlements	 could
easily	pick	off	his	gunners.	Several	had	been	lost	that	way	and	men	with	their	skills	were	difficult	to
replace.	His	supplies	of	powder	too	were	limited.
He	must	be	patient,	Humayun	thought,	swaying	a	little	in	the	saddle,	just	as	he	had	forced	himself	to
be	while	waiting	for	news	of	Hindal’s	rescue	of	Akbar.	But	it	was	hard	knowing	Kamran	was	so	close.
Sometimes	 it	 was	 all	 Humayun	 could	 do	 not	 to	 gallop	 up	 the	 ramp	 to	 the	 citadel	 and	 challenge	 his
brother	to	single	combat.	Not	that	Kamran	would	ever	agree	–	all	Humayun	would	get	would	be	an
arrow	in	the	throat.
Behind	 him,	 the	 cannon	 began	 to	 boom	 once	 more.Turning	 his	 head	 painfully	 Humayun	 looked

back	 at	 the	 citadel.	 Not	 for	 the	 first	 time,	 the	 fear	 that	 Kamran	 was	 no	 longer	 there	 seized	 him.
Suppose	there	was	a	secret	route	from	the	citadel	down	through	the	rocks	and	away.	He	hadn’t	known
of	 any	 in	 his	 youth	 but	 it	 was	 always	 possible	 Kamran	 had	 located	 one	 and	 fled,	 leaving	 others	 to
defend	the	fortress	on	his	behalf.
He	could	wait	no	longer.	He	would	talk	to	his	commanders	about	storming	the	citadel.	It	would	be
costly	 in	 lives	 but	 with	 their	 overwhelming	 numbers	 the	 outcome	 would	 surely	 not	 be	 in	 doubt.
Glancing	 down,	 he	 noticed	 that	 the	 ground	 beneath	 his	 horse’s	 hooves	 was	 spongy	 with	 moisture
from	 the	 melting	 snow.	 Every	 day	 the	 patches	 of	 bare	 ground	 were	 growing	 bigger.	 At	 least	 the
seasons	were	on	his	side	.	.	.

‘Nadim	Khwaja	is	wounded.	He	and	his	men	are	being	shot	down	by	the	musketeers	and	archers	on
the	battlements	even	before	they	can	get	their	scaling	ladders	into	position	against	the	walls,’	shouted
Bairam	 Khan	 to	 Humayun	 when	 the	 attack	 on	 the	 citadel	 had	 been	 under	 way	 for	 half	 an	 hour.	 ‘I’ll
rush	as	many	musketeers	as	I	can	to	try	to	pick	off	the	defenders	as	they	expose	themselves	by	firing
at	our	men.’
‘Order	the	artillerymen	to	redouble	their	fire.	The	smoke	from	their	cannon	will	at	least	give	some
cover,’	Humayun	commanded.	As	he	watched,	some	of	the	defenders	fell	back	from	the	wall	behind
its	 deeply	 crenellated	 battlements,	 seemingly	 wounded.	 At	 least	 two	 others	 pitched	 head	 first	 over
them	 to	 smash	 on	 the	 rocks	 below,	 but	 the	 defenders’	 fire	 did	 not	 slacken	 and	 more	 and	 more	 of
Humayun’s	men	were	falling.	‘Sound	the	retreat,	Bairam	Khan,’	Humayun	ordered.	‘We	are	making
little	progress	and	we	cannot	afford	to	lose	so	many	good	men.’
Soon	 those	 of	 Humayun’s	 soldiers	 who	 had	 survived	 the	 attack	 began	 making	 their	 way	 past	 his
command	 position,	 some	 limping,	 others	 bleeding	 from	 bandaged	 wounds.	 As	 a	 litter	 was	 carried
past	by	two	men,	Humayun	heard	the	man	on	it	scream	in	pain	like	an	animal	and	saw	that	his	right
arm	 and	 shoulder	 had	 been	 burned	 by	 pitch	 poured	 on	 to	 the	 attackers	 from	 the	 battlements.	 As
Humayun	looked,	his	body	kicked	and	twisted	and	suddenly	he	was	still,	free	of	his	torment	for	ever.
Almost	the	last	to	pass	Humayun	and	Bairam	Khan	was	Nadim	Khwaja,	the	broken	shaft	of	an	arrow
protruding	from	his	thigh	as	he	lay	on	a	rough	stretcher	made	of	branches	and	jute	cloth.	But	Nadim
Khwaja	said,	‘It’s	nothing,	Majesty,	only	a	flesh	wound.	I’ll	live	to	serve	again.’
It	was	good	he	had	such	loyal	supporters,	but	could	he	count	on	the	rest	of	his	troops	to	be	ready	to
take	more	casualties?	He	had	promised	them	rewards	on	victory	but	that	would	only	mean	something
to	them	if	they	believed	they	would	be	victorious	in	the	end.	How	could	he	take	Kabul?	How	could	he
capture	Kamran?	For	the	first	time	he	felt	truly	at	a	loss.
‘What	should	our	next	move	be,	Bairam	Khan?	I	know	I	can	trust	you	to	tell	the	truth.’
‘A	frontal	attack	was	as	I	think	we	both	know	a	mistake	–	a	mistake	born	out	of	frustration.	We	must
once	more	be	patient	and	keep	the	siege	tight.	We	can	and	should	send	our	men	out	for	more	supplies
but	Kamran	and	his	troops	cannot.They	have	no	hope	of	relief.Their	morale	will	decay	before	ours	if
we	hold	our	nerve.’
‘Wise	advice.	Give	the	necessary	orders	to	reinforce	the	siege.’

As	he	approached	one	of	the	picket	posts	around	the	perimeter	of	the	camp	on	a	tour	of	inspection,
Humayun	 heard	 angry	 voices.	 Probably	 another	 squabble	 about	 ownership	 of	 a	 sheep	 or	 a	 goat,	 he
thought	 without	 much	 interest.	 As	 he	 drew	 nearer,	 he	 saw	 the	 cause	 of	 the	 shouting.	 A	 man	 with	 a
stubbly	shaved	head	was	standing	dagger	in	hand	amidst	six	of	Humayun’s	soldiers,	who	had	drawn
their	swords.
Humayun	reined	in	his	horse.	‘What’s	going	on?’
Recognising	him,	the	soldiers	at	once	touched	their	hands	to	their	breasts.	Humayun	saw	the	man’s
eyes	 flicker	 over	 his	 horse’s	 enamelled	 gold	 bridle	 and	 the	 jewelled	 clasps	 on	 his	 sheepskin	 coat,
assessing	who	he	might	be.
‘I	am	the	emperor.	Who	are	you	and	why	are	you	causing	trouble	here?’
The	man	looked	startled	but	recovered	himself.‘I	am	Javed,	a	Ghilzai.	I	didn’t	start	it.Your	soldiers
thought	I	was	a	spy	.	.	.	’
‘Are	you?’
‘No.	I	came	to	your	camp	openly.	I	have	information.’
‘About	what?’
‘That	depends	on	the	price.’
At	Javed’s	insolent	words,	a	soldier	stepped	forward	and	jabbing	him	in	the	small	of	his	back	with
a	spear	butt	pushed	him	to	the	ground.	‘On	your	knees	before	the	emperor.	Show	some	respect	.	.	.	’
Humayun	 let	 the	 man	 lie	 for	 a	 moment	 on	 the	 dank	 ground	 before	 saying,	 ‘Get	 up.’	 Javed
scrambled	to	his	feet	and	for	the	first	time	looked	a	little	nervous.
‘I	repeat	my	question.	What	information	do	you	have?	I	–	not	you	–	will	decide	whether	it’s	worth
paying	for.	If	you	don’t	tell	me,	my	men	will	force	it	from	you.’
Javed	 hesitated.	 Was	 he	 simple-minded,	 Humayun	 wondered?	 Only	 an	 idiot	 would	 ride	 into	 a
military	camp	and	then	seek	to	bargain	with	an	emperor.	But	Javed	seemed	to	have	made	his	decision.
‘There’s	 sickness	 in	 the	 town.	 Some	 two	 or	 three	 hundred	 have	 already	 died	 and	 more	 bodies	 are
piling	up	in	the	bazaars	.	.	.	’
‘When	did	this	start?’
‘A	few	days	ago.’
‘How	do	you	know?’
‘From	 my	 brother	 who	 is	 inside	 the	 town.	 He	 and	 I	 are	 horse	 and	 mule	 dealers.	 As	 we	 do	 every
year,	we	came	to	Kabul	to	sell	our	animals	to	the	merchants	who	need	them	to	transport	goods	when
the	snows	recede	and	the	caravans	begin.	I	was	tending	our	beasts	in	the	hills	when	the	commander	of
the	 Kabul	 garrison	 ordered	 the	 gates	 to	 be	 closed	 against	 your	 advancing	 army.	 My	 brother	 –	 who
was	 transacting	 business	 in	 one	 of	 the	 caravanserais	 –	 was	 trapped.	 Over	 the	 weeks	 since	 the	 siege
began	 I	 of	 course	 heard	 nothing	 from	 him.	 But	 my	 hunting	 dog	 was	 with	 him.	 Three	 nights	 ago	 it
returned	to	my	encampment	in	the	hills,	a	message	tied	to	its	collar.	My	brother	must	have	found	a
way	 to	 lower	 the	 dog	 over	 the	 city	 walls,	 though	 not	 without	 injury	 –	 one	 of	 its	 sides	 was	 badly
grazed	and	bleeding	and	it	was	lame	in	one	paw.	Nevertheless,	it	managed	to	find	me.’
‘What	else	did	the	message	say?	Why	did	you	think	this	would	be	of	interest	to	me?
The	cunning	returned	to	Javed’s	face.	‘My	brother	writes	of	panic	and	fear	in	the	town.	He	says	the
citizens	want	the	siege	to	end	so	they	can	escape	the	city	and	its	pestilence.	He	believes	the	people	may

even	rise	up	against	the	garrison	and	throw	open	the	gates	to	you.’
‘Show	me	this	message.’
Javed	 bent	 and	 reaching	 down	 inside	 his	 boot	 produced	 a	 much-folded	 piece	 of	 paper	 which	 he
handed	 to	 Humayun.	 Humayun	 unwrapped	 it	 and	 scrutinised	 the	 dense	 lines	 of	 badly	 written	 Turki.
They	confirmed	everything	Javed	had	said.	The	last	words	read:	The	disease	comes	without	warning,
striking	down	even	the	young	and	healthy.	First	comes	a	high	fever	and	vomiting,	next	uncontrollable
diarrhoea,	 then	 delirium	 and	 death.	 Every	 day	 the	 stinking	 piles	 of	 bodies	 grow	 higher.	 We	 are	 in	 a
trap	 from	 which	 there	 is	 no	 escape.	 We	 talk	 of	 killing	 the	 garrison	 while	 we	 still	 have	 strength	 and
opening	 the	 gates	 but	 perhaps	 we	 will	 not	 have	 to.	 The	 soldiers	 are	 also	 dying.	 They	 too	 know	 that
unless	the	siege	is	lifted	or	God	shows	us	his	mercy,	many	more	will	die.	But	God	has	turned	his	face
away.	 What	 have	 we	 done	 to	 anger	 him?	 I	 hope	 this	 note	 reaches	 you,	 brother,	 because	 we	 may	 not
meet	again.
As	 Humayun	 took	 in	 the	 full	 import	 of	 those	 words,	 his	 pulse	 quickened.This	 could	 be	 the
opportunity	 he	 was	 seeking	 –	 yet	 could	 he	 trust	 Javed?	 He	 might	 even	 be	 an	 agent	 of	 Kamran.
Humayun	 kept	 his	 voice	 calm	 and	 cold.	 ‘You	 seem	 more	 interested	 in	 personal	 gain	 than	 in	 your
brother ’s	well-being,	but	if	this	information	is	true	you	will	be	rewarded.	If	it	is	false	I	will	have	you
killed.’	Humayun	turned	to	his	soldiers.	‘Keep	him	closely	confined.’
As	Javed	was	led	away,	Humayun	kicked	his	horse	on	again	and	making	for	his	command	tent	in
the	centre	of	the	camp	allowed	himself	a	smile.	If	what	the	message	said	was	indeed	the	truth,	Kabul
might	soon	be	his,	but	only	if	he	knew	how	to	exploit	the	information	to	maximum	effect.

‘Majesty,	the	citizens	of	Kabul	have	sent	an	envoy.	Half	an	hour	ago,	the	gates	opened	and	a	bullock
cart	carrying	an	old	man	came	trundling	out	towards	our	lines.	He	is	waving	some	sort	of	rag	as	a
sign	he	wishes	to	speak	to	us.’
So	 it	 had	 taken	 only	 three	 days.	 Immediately	 after	 receiving	 Javed’s	 intelligence,	 Humayun	 had
strengthened	the	ring	of	troops	he	had	placed	noose-like	around	the	city.	He	had	also	withdrawn	some
of	 his	 cannon	 from	 the	 assault	 on	 the	 citadel	 and,	 placing	 them	 behind	 makeshift	 barricades	 for
protection,	had	ordered	his	gunners	to	fire	at	the	city	walls	to	further	demoralise	the	inhabitants	and
the	garrison.	Apart	from	a	few	half-hearted	return	salvos	on	the	first	day,	the	guns	on	the	battlements
had	remained	silent	and	there’d	been	few	signs	of	defenders	on	the	city	walls.
‘Bring	the	envoy	to	me.’
As	he	waited	outside	his	tent,	Humayun	felt	the	warm	sun	of	an	early	spring	morning	on	his	face.	It
felt	good.	So	did	his	growing	conviction	that	victory	was	almost	close	enough	to	reach	out	and	touch.
He	must	not	allow	it	to	elude	his	grasp.
The	 envoy	 was	 indeed	 old	 –	 so	 ancient	 in	 fact	 that	 he	 couldn’t	 walk	 without	 the	 help	 of	 a	 tall,
polished	wood	staff.	Reaching	Humayun,	he	attempted	to	bow	low	but	couldn’t.	‘Forgive	me,	Majesty,
it	isn’t	lack	of	respect	that	prevents	me,	only	my	old	bones	.	.	.	But	I	have	escaped	the	sickness.	That	is
why	I	was	chosen	as	the	city’s	messenger.’
‘Fetch	him	a	stool.’	Humayun	waited	as	the	old	man	lowered	himself	painfully	down,	then	asked,
‘What	is	your	message	to	me?’
‘Many	in	our	city	are	dying.	We	do	not	know	the	cause	–	perhaps	our	water	supply	became	tainted

when	the	soldiers	tried	to	poison	the	wells	and	springs	outside	–	but	it	is	especially	the	young	who	are
suffering.	Many	mothers	in	Kabul	have	reason	to	mourn	a	loss.	We	are	all	weary	of	conflict	–	even
the	garrison	on	whose	behalf	I	also	speak.	We	wish	for	an	end	to	the	siege	so	that	those	who	want	can
leave	the	city.’
‘I	will	accept	nothing	less	than	total	surrender.’
‘That	is	what	I	told	them	you	would	say.	Majesty,	don’t	you	remember	me	.	.	.	?’
Humayun	 stared	 at	 his	 old	 face,	 wrinkled	 as	 an	 apricot	 left	 to	 dry	 in	 the	 sun.	 Something	 was
familiar.
‘I	am	Yusuf,	eldest	nephew	of	Wali	Gul	who	was	once	your	father ’s	treasurer.	I	remember	you	and
your	brother	Kamran	as	boys	.	.	.	It	is	sad	that	it	should	have	come	to	this	between	you	.	.	.	it	is	also
hard	that	ordinary	people	should	suffer	because	of	the	ambitions	of	princes.	I	have	always	known	that
you	–	the	son	most	beloved	by	Babur	–	were	the	rightful	King	of	Kabul.	But	men	are	fickle	and	these
days	seem	to	care	more	for	expedience	than	honour.	When	they	believed	Kamran	would	defeat	you,
they	gave	their	allegiance	to	him.’
‘That	 is	 why	 the	 citizens	 must	 submit	 to	 me	 unconditionally.	 Go	 back	 and	 tell	 them	 that	 if	 every
man	–	the	soldiers	of	the	garrison	as	well	as	the	ordinary	people	–	lays	down	his	arms	I	will	spare
their	lives.	I	want	all	the	weapons	from	cannon	and	muskets	to	swords	and	bows	brought	out	and	piled
before	the	gates.	The	people	themselves	cannot	leave	–	not	until	the	disease	has	run	its	course.	I’ll	not
put	my	own	men	at	risk.	But	I	will	send	in	hakims	and	supplies	of	fresh	food	and	water	.	.	.	What	will
be	their	answer?’
Yusuf’s	dark	brown	eyes	looked	close	to	tears.	‘They	will	bless	you	for	your	mercy,	Majesty.’
Slowly	 Yusuf	 rose	 and	 leaning	 heavily	 on	 his	 staff	 made	 his	 way	 back	 to	 the	 bullock	 cart	 and
climbed	in.	Soon	the	cart	was	on	its	way	back	towards	the	city,	whose	gates	swung	open	to	receive	it.
Would	they	open	as	easily	in	response	to	his	terms,	Humayun	wondered,	as	he	paced	back	and	forth	in
front	of	his	tent,	feeling	too	tense	to	answer	Jauhar ’s	summons	to	the	midday	meal.	An	hour	passed,
and	then	another.	Then	a	noise	arose	within	the	walls	of	the	city,	faint	at	first	but	quickly	growing	in
intensity	 .	 .	 .	 the	 sound	 of	 thousands	 of	 voices	 cheering.	 It	 could	 only	 mean	 that	 the	 citizens	 had
decided	to	surrender.
Minutes	later,	the	gates	were	pulled	wide	open	and	a	number	of	bullock	carts	emerged.	When	they
had	gone	only	halfway	into	the	no-man’s-land	between	the	town	walls	and	his	encircling	forces,	they
stopped	and	the	drivers	and	the	men	sitting	beside	them	began	to	throw	the	contents	–	weapons	of	all
sorts	and	bows,	muskets	glinting	in	the	sunlight	–	unceremoniously	down	to	form	rough	heaps	on	the
earth.
Humayun	smiled.	He	had	judged	the	surrender	terms	correctly.	The	city	was	his	but	his	task	was	not
even	half	complete.	Kamran’s	troops	still	occupied	the	citadel.	Humayun	knew	that	if	his	half-brother
was	still	with	them	he	would	be	watching	the	city’s	surrender.	How	would	he	react	now?
The	answer	was	not	long	in	coming.	From	the	battlements	Kamran’s	men	fired	volleys	of	arrows
towards	 Humayun’s	 cannon	 positions.	 They	 were	 accompanied	 by	 the	 discharge	 of	 small	 cannon
Kamran	had	positioned	on	the	citadel	walls.	Then	Humayun	heard	the	drums	above	the	citadel	gates
boom	and	trumpets	blare	and	saw	the	gates	inch	slowly	open.	Was	Kamran	about	to	surrender?	No.
Suddenly	Humayun	saw	soldiers	wielding	long	whips	drive	a	dozen	or	so	skinny	oxen	with	bundles
of	 burning	 straw	 tied	 on	 to	 their	 backs	 through	 the	 gates	 and	 down	 the	 ramp	 towards	 Humayun’s
positions.	Terrified,	the	animals	charged	onwards	like	living	torches.‘Shoot	them	down	before	they
burn	the	artillerymen’s	tents	or	set	alight	their	powder	stores,’	yelled	Humayun.
Soon	 eleven	 of	 the	 oxen	 lay	 on	 the	 ramp,	 arrows	 protruding	 from	 their	 corpses.	 Only	 one	 in	 its

pain-maddened	charge	had	reached	Humayun’s	position	and	it	had	been	despatched	before	it	could	do
any	serious	damage.	However,	three	of	Humayun’s	archers	had	been	badly	wounded,	shot	down	from
the	battlements	of	the	citadel	as	they	left	cover	to	fire	on	the	oxen.
This	response	convinced	Humayun	as	could	nothing	else	that	Kamran	had	not	fled	as	he	had	feared
but	was	still	within	the	citadel.	It	was	so	typical	of	him.	When	they	were	young,	Kamran	had	always
taken	any	defeat	in	play	or	in	sport	hard,	as	a	child	sticking	his	tongue	out	at	Humayun	and	balling	his
fists	 and,	 when	 they	 were	 youths,	 crying	 ‘foul’	 and	 promising	 all	 would	 be	 different	 at	 their	 next
encounter.	 In	 those	 days,	 Humayun	 had	 laughingly	 ignored	 Kamran	 and	 his	 gestures	 and	 thus
increased	 his	 half-brother ’s	 rage.	 Now,	 though,	 he	 would	 test	 Kamran’s	 resolve	 and,	 even	 more
important,	 that	 of	 his	 confederates.	 After	 some	 minutes’	 thought,	 Humayun	 sat	 down	 to	 compose	 a
letter	to	Kamran,	then	sent	for	Jauhar.
‘I	wish	you	to	ride	to	the	citadel	with	this	ultimatum	for	my	brother.	I	will	read	it	to	you	so	you
know	what	words	you	carry.	They	are	few	and	they	are	blunt.	“Our	sister	Gulbadan	tried	to	appeal	to
your	 sense	 of	 family	 honour,	 of	 duty.	 You	 wouldn’t	 listen.	 Instead	 to	 your	 everlasting	 shame	 you
threatened	 the	 life	 of	 a	 child	 –	 your	 own	 nephew.	 The	 town	 of	 Kabul	 has	 fallen	 to	 me	 and	 your
position	 is	 without	 hope	 so	 I	 offer	 you	 this	 choice,	 out	 of	 concern	 not	 for	 you	 but	 for	 those	 who
follow	you.	Surrender	the	citadel	and	I	swear	that	I	will	spare	your	men.	Your	own	fate,	however,	will
be	 for	 me	 to	 decide	 and	 I	 can	 give	 you	 no	 promises.	 If	 you	 will	 not	 surrender,	 I	 will	 turn	 my	 full
might	against	you.	However	long	it	takes,	my	men	will	pound	your	walls	to	dust	and	once	inside	kill
every	man	in	the	citadel	without	quarter.	You	have	until	sunset	to	give	me	your	answer.	If	it	is	no,	I
will	have	archers	fire	arrows	containing	this	message	within	your	walls	under	cover	of	night	so	that
your	followers	can	see	how	cheap	you	hold	their	lives.”’
In	fact,	Jauhar	had	barely	been	back	from	the	citadel	an	hour	and	the	sun	was	still	a	spear ’s	length
above	the	horizon	when,	from	where	he	was	standing	on	the	perimeter	of	the	camp	talking	to	Ahmed
Khan,	Humayun	saw	a	rider	slowly	descend	the	steep	ramp	from	the	citadel	and	then	set	out	across	the
plain	towards	them.As	the	man	drew	nearer,	Humayun	saw	a	flag	of	truce	fluttering	from	the	tip	of	his
spear.	The	minutes	seemed	to	pass	impossibly	slowly	as	Humayun	waited	but	at	last	the	rider	was	just
a	 few	 yards	 away	 –	 a	 young	 man	 in	 chain	 mail,	 with	 a	 falcon’s	 plume	 in	 his	 helmet	 and	 a	 sombre
expression.	Reining	in	his	horse,	he	dismounted	and	raised	his	arms	from	his	sides	to	show	he	wasn’t
armed.
‘Approach,’	Humayun	said.
When	he	was	some	ten	paces	from	Humayun,	the	young	man	fell	to	the	ground	in	the	full	obeisance
of	the	korunush.	Then,	getting	to	his	feet,	he	spoke.	‘Majesty.	The	message	I	bring	is	short.	The	citadel
of	Kabul	is	yours.’
A	 fierce	 joy	 surged	 through	 Humayun.	 At	 the	 same	 time	 came	 a	 thought.	 Before	 he	 did	 anything
else	he	would	ride	to	the	gardens	his	father	had	laid	out	on	the	hills	overlooking	Kabul	where	Babur ’s
grave	lay	open	to	the	sun,	rain,	wind	and	snow.	There,	kneeling	by	the	simple	marble	slab,	he	would
give	thanks.	Just	as	Babur	had	done,	he	would	use	Kabul	as	the	stepping	stone	for	his	reconquest	of
Hindustan.

Trumpets	 sounded	 as	 beneath	 a	 brilliant	 blue	 sky	 Humayun	 rode	 at	 the	 head	 of	 a	 picked	 column	 of
men	representing	all	the	clans	who	had	joined	in	his	conquest	of	Kabul,	up	past	where	his	cannon	had
been	stationed,	past	where	he	had	looked	up	to	see	to	his	anguish	Akbar	exposed	as	a	human	shield	on
the	battlements,	through	the	high	gate	from	which	the	fire-carrying	oxen	had	charged	and	on	into	the
sunlit	 courtyard	 of	 the	 citadel	 itself.	 As	 he	 dismounted	 from	 his	 black	 horse,	 an	 immense	 pride	 in
what	 he	 had	 achieved	 since	 he	 left	 Persia	 washed	 over	 him.	 Most	 important,	 of	 course,	 he	 had
recovered	Akbar,	but	he	had	also	reasserted	his	authority	over	Kamran	and	Askari	and	re-occupied
the	kingdom	of	Kabul.
Bairam	Khan,	Nadim	Khwaja	and	others	of	his	generals	behind	were	exultant,	waving	at	the	crowds
and	rejoicing	in	their	victory.	But	mingling	with	Humayun’s	euphoria	were	more	sombre	thoughts.
Kneeling	 at	 his	 father ’s	 grave	 last	 night	 he	 had	 vowed	 never	 again	 to	 become	 a	 king	 without	 a
kingdom.	Before	he	could	even	think	of	retaking	Hindustan,	just	as	Babur	had	done	he	must	make	his
rule	over	Kabul	and	all	its	lands	unassailable.	He	must	force	every	chief	in	the	surrounding	territories
who	 ruled	 as	 his	 vassal	 to	 submit	 totally	 to	 his	 overlordship.	 Many	 of	 those	 chiefs	 had	 supported
Kamran	and	several	had	friendships	and	alliances	with	him	going	back	to	the	time	when	as	a	youth
Kamran	 had	 remained	 in	 Kabul	 while	 Humayun	 had	 accompanied	 Babur	 on	 his	 conquest	 of
Hindustan.	 They	 would	 require	 careful	 handling.	 A	 simple	 show	 of	 force	 might	 obtain	 their
allegiance	 for	 a	 while	 but	 what	 would	 happen	 when	 he	 advanced	 on	 Hindustan?	 They	 might	 well
rebel.
First,	 though,	 he	 must	 deal	 with	 the	 half-brother	 whom	 he’d	 last	 seen	 face	 to	 face	 two	 years	 ago
when	 he’d	 woken	 in	 his	 tent	 in	 a	 blizzard	 to	 find	 his	 knife	 at	 his	 throat.	 ‘Where	 is	 Kamran?’	 he
demanded	of	Jauhar,	who	was	as	usual	at	his	side.
‘I	was	told	he	is	being	held	in	the	cells	beneath	the	citadel.’
‘Have	him	brought	before	me	here	in	the	courtyard	now.’
‘Yes,	Majesty.’
A	 few	 minutes	 later,	 Humayun	 saw	 Kamran	 emerge	 through	 a	 low	 door	 which	 led	 up	 from	 the
cells,	blinking	at	his	sudden	exposure	to	sunlight.	His	legs	were	tightly	shackled	and	he	was	followed
by	two	armed	guards.	However,	his	hands	were	free	and	as	he	passed	three	grooms	leading	some	of
Humayun’s	commanders’	horses	back	to	the	stables	at	the	conclusion	of	the	entry	parade,	he	suddenly
grabbed	a	long	riding	whip	from	one	of	them.	Before	the	guards	could	react,	he	had	placed	it	round
his	neck	in	the	same	way	that	the	whip	was	placed	round	the	neck	of	common	criminals	condemned	to
be	flogged	as	they	were	led	to	the	punishment	frame.
Was	 Kamran	 suggesting	 he	 was	 submitting	 himself	 to	 whatever	 punishment	 he	 might	 impose,
Humayun	wondered?	He	motioned	to	his	guards	to	leave	the	whip	where	it	was	and	walked	towards
his	half-brother.	As	he	drew	closer,	he	saw	that	Kamran	looked	unkempt	and	the	bags	beneath	his	eyes
showed	exhaustion,	but	his	green	eyes	themselves	looked	straight	into	Humayun’s	and	betrayed	not	a
hint	 of	 submission	 or	 repentance,	 merely	 arrogance	 and	 disdain.	 There	 was	 even	 a	 trace	 of	 a
supercilious	smile	on	his	lips.
How	can	he	jest	with	me?	How	can	he	not	recognise	his	guilt	for	what	he	has	done?	How	can	he	not
show	some	signs	of	remorse	for	the	many	lives	lost	on	his	account,	for	all	those	wasted	years	when
we	could	have	been	re-conquering	Hindustan,	thought	Humayun.As	he	stared	at	his	half-brother	the
image	of	Kamran	pushing	Hamida	to	the	floor	as	he	grabbed	Akbar	in	the	tent	came	unbidden	into	his
mind,	 quickly	 followed	 by	 that	 of	 Akbar	 exposed	 on	 the	 walls	 of	 Kabul	 as	 the	 cannon	 roared.
Suddenly	emotion	erupted	like	a	volcano	within	him	and	he	lost	all	control.	He	hit	Kamran	with	his
clenched	 fist	 hard	 in	 the	 mouth,	 breaking	 one	 of	 his	 teeth	 and	 splitting	 his	 lip,	 yelling	 ‘That	 is	 for

Hamida’	as	he	did	so.	Next	he	brought	up	his	knee	with	all	the	force	he	could	muster	into	Kamran’s
groin.	‘And	that	is	for	Akbar!’	he	screamed,	eyes	bulging.	Then	he	brought	both	his	arms	down	on
Kamran’s	neck	and	Kamran	fell	to	the	floor	where	he	lay	doubled	up,	clutching	his	groin	and	spitting
out	bloody	bits	of	tooth	but	uttering	not	a	single	word,	not	a	single	groan.
Shaking	with	fury,	Humayun	was	drawing	back	his	foot,	ready	to	kick	his	defiant,	devious	brother
hard	in	the	stomach,	when	a	cry	of	dismay	from	behind	him	broke	into	his	rage.	He	twisted	round	to
see	frail	old	Kasim	shuffling	towards	him	as	fast	as	he	could	propel	himself	on	the	two	ivory-handled
walking	sticks	that	he	had	long	relied	on.
‘Majesty,	 this	 is	 not	 the	 way.	 If	 he	 must	 die,	 let	 him	 do	 so	 with	 dignity	 as	 befits	 a	 descendant	 of
Timur.	What	would	your	father	think?’
His	words	felt	to	Humayun	like	a	bucket	of	cold	water	poured	over	him,	cooling	his	temper.	Kasim
was	right.	He	stepped	back	from	his	half-brother.	‘I	forgot	myself,	Kamran.	I	lowered	myself	to	your
level.	I	will	decide	your	fate	later	and	not	in	the	heat	of	my	anger.	Guards!	Pick	him	up.	Take	him	back
to	the	cells,	but	do	not	ill-treat	him.’

Humayun	surveyed	his	audience	chamber	with	satisfaction.	Hangings	of	Moghul	green	shone	in	the
light	 of	 hundreds	 of	 candles	 and	 wicks	 burning	 in	 diyas	 of	 scented	 oil.	 This	 was	 truly	 a	 victory
celebration.	It	had	been	such	a	long	time	–	years	–	since	he	had	been	able	to	reward	his	warriors	as	a
Moghul	 ruler	 should.The	 treasuries	 and	 armouries	 of	 Kabul	 –	 though	 not	 as	 full	 as	 in	 his	 father ’s
time	 –	 had	 yielded	 enough	 jewelled	 daggers	 and	 swords,	 coats	 of	 fine	 mail,	 finely	 chased	 armour,
enamelled	and	gem-encrusted	drinking	cups	and	gold	and	silver	coins	to	reward	all	his	commanders
and	 officers	 and	 their	 men.	 That	 Kamran	 had	 been	 so	 prudent	 with	 Kabul’s	 wealth	 had	 surprised
Humayun.
His	officers	and	commanders	were	eating	now	–	the	sweet,	juicy	flesh	of	young	lambs,	chickens
roasted	 in	 butter,	 quails	 and	 pheasants	 stewed	 with	 dried	 fruits	 and	 served	 whole,	 their	 tail	 feathers
still	attached	but	gilded,	and	fragrant	flat	bread	still	hot	from	the	bricks	on	which	it	had	been	baked.
The	luxurious	abundance	–	the	exquisite	dishes	on	which	the	food	was	served	–	seemed	a	dream	after
all	the	years	of	danger	and	hardship,	of	betrayal	and	deceit.	Humayun’s	eyes	rested	with	real	affection
on	the	battle-scarred	faces	of	Zahid	Beg	and	Ahmed	Khan	and	on	the	lined	faces	of	Kasim	and	Sharaf,
who	had	followed	him	across	blistering	deserts	and	over	mountains	where	the	cold	was	so	intense	it
seemed	to	freeze	a	man’s	heart.	When	his	warriors	had	numbered	less	than	two	hundred	–	and	what
tribal	leader	here	tonight	had	so	few?	–	these	loyal	men	had	stayed	with	him.
Later,	 as	 the	 final	 course	 of	 the	 meal	 –	 sweetmeats	 of	 all	 descriptions	 including	 dried	 apricots
stuffed	with	walnuts	and	curd	cheese	mixed	with	sultanas	and	pistachios	–	was	brought	in	on	silver
platters,	Humayun	looked	around	at	his	commanders,	all	enjoying	the	feast	and	discussing	the	future
and	the	prospects	for	the	reconquest	of	Hindustan.	He	felt	content	as	he	had	not	done	for	many	years.
He	 had	 never	 doubted	 his	 courage	 or	 skill	 in	 combat;	 nor,	 he	 suspected,	 had	 his	 followers.	 But	 he
knew	 he	 had	 gained	 other	 perhaps	 more	 important	 strengths	 as	 well.	 He	 was	 becoming	 ever	 more
confident	in	his	authority	as	a	ruler	and	a	leader	and	in	his	ability	to	inspire	loyalty	in	those	such	as
Bairam	Khan	who	had	no	pre-existing	ties	to	him.
But	 what	 about	 those	 who	 had	 such	 ties	 but	 had	 not	 been	 loyal,	 among	 them	 the	 nobles	 and

commanders	 who	 had	 supported	 Kamran	 and	 Askari	 and,	 of	 course,	 his	 half-brothers	 themselves?
Humayun’s	 mood	 sobered.	 Over	 the	 past	 sixty	 hours	 since	 he	 had	 entered	 the	 citadel	 he	 had	 been
pondering	 their	 fate,	 especially	 Kamran’s.	 He	 had	 nearly	 yielded	 to	 a	 visceral	 desire	 to	 revenge
himself	on	his	half-brother	with	his	bare	hands	for	threatening	his	child.
But	as	his	rage	had	cooled	he	had	begun	to	think	more	calmly.	He	could	never	forgive	Kamran	but
did	he	owe	it	to	the	future	of	his	dynasty	to	try	to	heal	the	rifts	within	it	rather	than	deepening	them?
His	father ’s	face	–	so	like	Kamran’s	with	those	brilliant	green	eyes	–	swam	before	him.	Suddenly	the
contentment	 and	 confidence	 welling	 through	 him	 coalesced	 to	 make	 his	 decision.	 Standing	 up,
Humayun	called	Jauhar	to	him.	‘Have	Kamran	and	Askari	brought	before	me	here,	at	once,	together
with	those	of	their	leading	commanders	whom	we	have	also	kept	prisoner.’
A	 quarter	 of	 an	 hour	 later,	 Jauhar	 whispered	 to	 Humayun	 that	 the	 prisoners	 were	 outside	 the
chamber ’s	 thick	 doors.	 Humayun	 rose	 to	 his	 feet	 and	 clapped	 his	 hands	 to	 call	 for	 quiet.	 Almost
instantly	a	hush	fell	on	the	room	as	his	officers	put	down	their	eating	implements	and	goblets,	wiped
their	mouths,	sticky	from	the	sweetmeats,	and	turned	all	their	attention	to	their	emperor.
‘My	 loyal	 commanders,	 we	 have	 celebrated	 our	 victory	 and	 rightly	 rejoiced	 in	 our	 success	 in
overcoming	our	enemies,	but	our	task	is	only	half	complete.	Now	we	must	look	to	the	future	and	the
reconquest	of	Hindustan.	However,	first	I	must	deal	with	those	who,	unlike	you,	showed	me	no	loyalty
and	neglected	the	ties	of	blood	and	of	ancestral	obligations.	Bring	in	the	prisoners.’
Two	attendants	pulled	open	the	doors	and	Kamran	walked	into	the	room.	His	hands	were	tied	but
his	legs	were	free.	Straight-backed,	head	high,	and	bruised,	hawk-nosed	face	emotionless,	he	walked
forward,	looking	neither	to	left	nor	right	until	the	guards	escorting	him	halted	him	ten	feet	in	front	of
Humayun.	He	was	followed	by	Askari,	who	had	been	confined	in	comfortable	private	quarters	since
being	brought	to	the	citadel	but	whose	hands	were	now	also	bound.	Even	though	he	must	have	known
he	had	less	to	fear	than	his	brother	since	Humayun	had	promised	him	his	life,	his	demeanour	was	less
assured	than	Kamran’s.	He	was	perspiring	a	little	and	looking	round	and	smiling	nervously	at	some
of	 those	 of	 Humayun’s	 men	 he	 recognised.	 Behind	 him	 came	 ten	 of	 Kamran	 and	 Askari’s	 senior
commanders.	 Among	 them	 were	 Hassan	 Khahil,	 a	 burly,	 wild-haired	 Uzbek,	 and	 Shahi	 Beg,	 a
diminutive	 but	 courageous	 Tajik	 with	 a	 livid	 white	 scar	 on	 his	 left	 cheek.	 He	 had	 been	 Kamran’s
commander	in	Kabul	and	was	in	fact	a	cousin	of	Zahid	Beg,	Humayun’s	own	general.	As	Shahi	Beg
entered,	Humayun	noticed	the	two	men’s	eyes	met	but	then	both	looked	instantly	away.
Once	 the	 commanders	 were	 lined	 up	 behind	 Kamran	 and	 Askari,	 Humayun	 began	 addressing	 his
own	troops.	‘You	see	before	you	the	men	we	have	defeated.	The	men	who	have	shed	our	blood	and
killed	our	friends.	Yet	the	war	we	have	fought	was	a	battle	between	brothers	and	relations.	I	know	this
only	too	well,	as	do	many	others	of	you.	We	have	fought	those	with	whom	we	should	have	banded
together	to	fight	the	common	enemy	who	has	usurped	our	lands	in	Hindustan.	Much	more	–	heritage,
tradition	and	ambition	–	should	bind	us	together	than	those	rivalries	and	jealousies	which	have	split
us	 apart.	 Divided	 among	 ourselves,	 we	 may	 never	 reconquer	 Hindustan.	 United	 we	 should	 be	 so
powerful	 we	 need	 fear	 none.	 The	 fear	 would	 be	 our	 enemy’s	 alone	 –	 our	 conquests	 and	 ambitions
would	be	without	limit.
‘For	 that	 reason	 I	 have	 preferred	 reconciliation	 to	 punishment,	 however	 well	 deserved.	 I	 have
decided	 to	 forgive	 these	 my	 former	 enemies	 you	 see	 before	 you,	 provided	 they	 will	 join	 us	 in
regaining	and	expanding	our	empire	in	Hindustan.’
With	that,	Humayun	walked	over	to	Askari	and	drawing	a	small	dagger	cut	his	brother ’s	bonds	and
embraced	him.	As	he	did	so,	he	felt	Askari	relax	and	there	were	wet	tears	on	his	half-brother ’s	cheek
as	 it	 brushed	 against	 his	 own.	 Then	 he	 moved	 towards	 Kamran	 and	 severed	 his	 bonds	 too	 and

embraced	him.	Kamran’s	body	felt	rigid	but	he	did	not	pull	back.	Nor	did	he	resist	as	Humayun	held
his	 and	 Askari’s	 arms	 aloft	 and	 yelled	 to	 the	 resounding	 cheers	 of	 all	 present,	 ‘Onwards	 to	 the
reconquest	of	Hindustan.’
An	hour	later,	Humayun	made	his	way	to	Hamida’s	apartments	in	the	royal	women’s	quarters.	She
had	arrived	with	Akbar	and	Gulbadan	the	previous	evening	and	in	the	joy	of	their	reunion	they	had
not	spoken	of	Kamran	and	his	fate.	As	he	entered,	he	could	tell	at	once	from	her	expression	that	she
knew	of	his	decision.
‘How	 could	 you!’	 she	 burst	 out.‘You	 have	 pardoned	 Kamran,	 the	 man	 who	 stole	 our	 child	 and
exposed	him	on	the	walls	of	Kabul.	Are	you	mad?	Don’t	you	care	about	our	son	and	my	feelings?’
‘You	know	I	do.	It	was	a	hard	decision.	A	ruler	must	think	about	more	than	his	personal	emotions.
He	 must	 think	 about	 what’s	 best	 for	 his	 kingdom.	 If	 I’d	 had	 Kamran	 executed,	 I	 would	 have	 made
implacable	enemies	of	some	of	his	most	loyal	followers	and	relations,	not	least	Askari	whom	I	had
already	 agreed	 should	 live	 as	 a	 condition	 of	 his	 surrender	 of	 Kandahar.	 If	 I’d	 had	 Kamran
imprisoned,	he	would	have	become	a	focus	for	discontent	and	plotting.	The	same	would	have	been
true	 if	 I’d	 punished	 his	 commanders.	 Our	 family	 is	 not	 the	 only	 one	 riven	 by	 the	 rebellions.	 Much
better	that	I	try	to	reconcile	my	enemies	than	to	provoke	blood	feuds.	If	I	am	to	reconquer	Hindustan,
I	will	need	the	willing	commitment	of	all	my	nobles	and	vassals,	not	just	those	who	have	supported	us
this	far.
‘Yes,	 of	 course	 I	 could	 press	 others	 to	 accompany	 me	 or	 to	 send	 levies,	 but	 they	 would	 soon	 be
plotting	or	looking	for	any	opportunity	to	defect	or	at	the	very	least	to	return	home.	That	would	not
help	to	win	back	our	lands.	The	wounds	that	are	most	difficult	to	heal	are	those	inflicted	by	the	ones
who	should	be	the	closest.	But	if	I	can	heal	those	from	my	brothers,	our	dynasty	will	be	the	stronger
and	Akbar ’s	position	in	its	future	the	more	secure.’
At	the	mention	of	Akbar,	Hamida’s	expression	softened	a	little,	but	it	still	betrayed	scepticism	and
uncertainty.	This	was	so	hard	for	her.	Humayun	thought	back	to	his	own	enraged	assault	on	Kamran.
At	least	he	had	had	an	opportunity	to	vent	his	feelings	.	.	.
‘I	loathe	Kamran.	I	can	never	forgive	him.’
‘Hamida,	I’m	not	asking	you	to	forgive	Kamran	–	that	I	know	you	can	never	do.	But	I	am	asking
you	to	trust	in	me	.	.	.	in	my	judgement.	And	I	have	another	more	personal	reason	for	sparing	Kamran
.	.	.	loyalty	to	my	father	and	above	all	the	promise	I	made	to	him	as	he	lay	dying	to	follow	his	wishes
and	do	nothing	against	my	half-brothers,	however	much	they	deserved	it.	Their	failure	to	honour	his
decision	 that	 I	 should	 succeed	 to	 the	 throne	 should	 not	 absolve	 me	 from	 keeping	 my	 own	 word	 to
him.’
Humayun	looked	straight	into	Hamida’s	eyes.	‘I	am	truly	sorry	if	my	decision	hurts	you,	but	you
must	know	nothing	can	alter	my	great	love	for	you	and	our	son	and	my	determination	that	when	I	die,
which	God	willing	will	not	be	yet,	I	will	leave	him	secure	on	the	throne	of	Hindustan	as	my	father	left
me.’
‘If	 you	 tell	 me	 that	 allowing	 Kamran	 to	 live	 will	 make	 Akbar ’s	 future	 more	 secure	 then	 I	 must
accept	 it.	 The	 future	 of	 our	 son	 is	 what	 matters	 most.	 But	 I	 cannot	 lie	 to	 you.	 In	 my	 heart	 I	 wish
Kamran	was	dead.	I	would	sleep	more	easily	in	that	knowledge.’
‘This	is	best	for	Akbar.’
At	last,	Hamida	smiled	and	stretched	out	her	hand	to	Humayun.	‘Come	to	bed.	It	is	late.’

It	 was	 nearly	 ten	 o’clock	 the	 next	 morning	 when	 Humayun	 emerged	 from	 the	 women’s	 quarters	 to
find	 Jauhar	 waiting	 for	 him,	 beaming	 broadly.	 ‘Majesty,	 good	 news	 .	 .	 .	 wonderful	 news.	 Our	 spies
have	brought	reports	that	Sher	Shah	is	dead.	He	was	assaulting	a	fortress	in	Rajasthan	when	a	missile
filled	with	burning	pitch	that	one	of	his	siege	engineers	had	hurled	at	the	walls	rebounded	and	landed
on	 a	 gunpowder	 store.	 The	 entire	 store	 exploded,	 dismembering	 Sher	 Shah	 and	 two	 of	 his	 senior
commanders.	They	say	parts	of	Sher	Shah’s	body	were	scattered	over	a	hundred	yards.’
‘Are	the	reports	reliable?’
‘The	spies	say	they	come	from	several	sources.	There	is	no	reason	to	doubt	them.’
Humayun	 found	 the	 news	 difficult	 to	 take	 in.	 It	 seemed	 to	 justify	 his	 decision	 to	 pardon	 his	 halfbrothers	and	unite	his	subjects.	They	would	need	to	act	quickly	and	together	to	seize	the	opportunity
to	regain	the	throne	of	Hindustan.
‘Call	my	commanders	to	me.	Let	my	half-brothers	join	us	too.	Together	we	will	march	to	fulfil	our
family’s	destiny.’

Part	IV
Return	of	the	Moghuls

Chapter	21
A	Brother’s	Grief
‘Majesty,	 you	 must	 come	 at	 once.’	 Humayun	 slid	 back	 into	 its	 embossed	 black	 leather	 scabbard	 the
ivory	 and	 steel-hilted	 sabre	 –	 a	 recent	 gift	 from	 a	 vassal	 –	 that	 he	 had	 been	 examining.	 ‘What	 is	 it,
Jauhar?’
Jauhar	 spread	 his	 hands	 in	 a	 helpless	 gesture	 and	 Humayun	 read	 such	 distress	 in	 his	 face	 that	 he
asked	no	more	questions	but	simply	followed	him.	Dusk	was	falling	and	purple	shadows	softened	the
stark	 outlines	 of	 stone	 and	 brick	 as	 Humayun	 quickly	 descended	 into	 the	 courtyard.	 Just	 inside	 the
gateway	 four	 of	 Ahmed	 Khan’s	 men	 were	 clustered	 around	 a	 tall	 chestnut	 horse.	 Drawing	 closer,
Humayun	noticed	that	its	neck	and	shoulder	were	stained	with	something	dark	that	was	attracting	flies,
and	as	the	men	stepped	back	from	the	horse	to	salute	him	he	saw	a	body	slung	face	down	over	the
saddle,	limp	as	a	dead	deer.	The	discolouration	on	the	horse’s	coat	was	congealed	blood.	But	it	was
the	body	itself	that	arrested	his	gaze.	Though	he	didn’t	want	to	believe	it	he	thought	he	recognised	that
powerful	 form,	 whose	 lifeless	 arms	 and	 legs	 were	 so	 long	 they	 dangled	 down	 beneath	 the	 horse’s
belly.
With	 an	 ever-increasing	 sense	 of	 foreboding	 Humayun	 slowly	 approached	 and,	 crouching	 down,
raised	the	dead	man’s	head.	Hindal’s	tawny	eyes	stared	blankly	at	him.	Unable	to	bear	their	unblinking
gaze,	Humayun	closed	them.	As	he	did	so,	the	warmth	of	his	brother ’s	dead	flesh	shocked	him,	then
he	realised	that	Hindal’s	face	had	been	resting	against	the	horse’s	flanks.	He	drew	his	dagger	from	his
sash	 and	 waving	 back	 his	 guards	 cut	 through	 the	 ropes	 with	 which	 someone	 had	 secured	 Hindal’s
body	 to	 the	 horse.	 Then	 he	 carefully	 lifted	 his	 brother ’s	 corpse	 and	 laid	 it	 gently,	 face	 up,	 on	 the
flagstones.	As	he	knelt	beside	it,	by	the	flickering	amber	light	of	a	torch	held	aloft	in	the	gathering
gloom	by	one	of	Ahmed	Khan’s	men	he	saw	a	raw	wound	in	Hindal’s	throat	that	only	an	arrowhead
could	have	made.
Grief	 washed	 through	 him.	 Hindal	 was	 the	 one	 of	 his	 half-brothers	 he	 had	 cared	 for	 most.
Courageous,	honest	and	principled,	and	less	ambitious	than	his	siblings,	perhaps	Hindal	had	been	at
heart	the	best	of	all	Babur ’s	sons.	‘I	wish	you	godspeed	to	Paradise,	my	brother,	and	that	in	death	you
will	forgive	me	the	hurt	I	did	you	in	life,’	Humayun	whispered.	Images	of	Hindal	in	his	youth	and	of
him	proudly	recounting	his	rescue	of	Akbar	filled	Humayun’s	mind,	bringing	tears	to	his	eyes.	It	was
some	 minutes	 before,	 brushing	 them	 away	 with	 the	 back	 of	 his	 hand,	 he	 got	 to	 his	 feet	 and	 asked,
‘Who	found	the	body?’
‘I	did,	Majesty,’	said	the	torchbearer,	who,	Humayun	saw,	was	no	more	than	a	youth.
‘Where?’
‘His	horse	was	tethered	by	some	juniper	bushes	half	a	mile	from	the	town.’
So	 someone	 had	 drawn	 out	 the	 fatal	 arrow,	 tied	 Hindal	 to	 his	 horse	 and	 then	 left	 him	 where	 he
would	be	found.	Such	an	act	bore	all	the	hallmarks	of	Kamran,	Humayun	thought	with	a	weariness	of
heart.	Far	from	being	grateful	for	his	mercy,	within	two	months	of	being	set	free	Kamran	and	Askari
had	vanished	from	Kabul.	United	against	him	again,	they	had	become	raiders,	sweeping	down	from

remote	 strongholds	 at	 the	 head	 of	 bands	 of	 tribesmen	 –	 lawless	 Kafirs	 and	 Chakraks	 mostly,	 but
whoever	 they	 could	 find;	 they	 weren’t	 particular	 –	 to	 attack	 Humayun’s	 outposts	 and	 the	 caravan
trains	that	were	the	source	of	Kabul’s	prosperity	–	its	life’s	blood.	Kamran	would	not	have	forgiven
Hindal’s	betrayal	in	rescuing	Akbar	and	he	certainly	had	the	malice	to	send	Humayun	the	message	of
Hindal’s	slaughtered	body.
But	what	had	actually	happened?	If	the	murderer	was	Kamran,	had	Hindal’s	death	been	the	result	of
a	chance	encounter	or	had	Kamran	deliberately	hunted	Hindal	down	in	the	northern	mountains	which
he	had	made	his	retreat	in	the	years	since	he	had	rescued	Akbar?	‘Search	my	brother ’s	body	and	his
saddlebag.	Look	for	anything	that	might	tell	us	how	or	why	he	met	his	end,’	Humayun	ordered	as	he
turned	away,	unable	to	face	the	task	himself.
A	few	minutes	later,	a	soldier	came	up	to	him	where	he	stood	in	the	gloom,	lost	in	his	thoughts	and
recollections.	‘We	found	nothing	of	importance,	Majesty,	except	this	note	in	the	saddlebag.’	Humayun
took	the	scrap	of	paper	and	read	it	by	the	light	of	a	torch.	In	a	few	brief	sentences	addressed	to	no	one,
Hindal	asked,	if	anything	should	happen	to	him,	to	be	buried	close	to	his	father.	He	also	wrote	that	he
wished	Akbar	to	have	his	ruby-inlaid	dagger	that	had	once	belonged	to	Babur.	‘The	dagger	was	still
in	his	sash,	Majesty.’	The	soldier	held	out	a	silver	scabbard,	also	inlaid	with	rubies,	that	glittered	in
the	torchlight.	So	whoever	had	killed	Hindal	had	not	been	a	thief,	Humayun	thought.	It	also	told	him
that	death	had	come	suddenly	and	probably	unexpectedly	to	Hindal,	who	had	had	no	time	to	draw	his
dagger.	Again	he	saw	Kamran’s	green-eyed,	sneering	face	.	.	.

Three	weeks	later,	the	branches	of	the	tall	cherry	trees	brought	by	Babur	as	saplings	to	Kabul	stirred
in	 the	 breeze,	 shedding	 blossom	 that	 fluttered	 like	 pink	 snowflakes.	 Spring	 melt	 water	 from	 the
mountains	 rippled	 through	 the	 two	 intersecting	 marble-lined	 channels	 that	 divided	 the	 garden	 into
four	quarters	planted	with	pomegranate,	apple	and	lemon	trees.	The	scent	of	honey	rose	from	the	lilac
clover	covering	the	ground	as,	walking	through	the	garden	Babur	had	planted,	Humayun	came	to	the
new	 grave	 in	 the	 middle	 of	 a	 grove	 of	 young	 willows.	 The	 inscription	 on	 the	 marble	 slab	 told	 the
onlooker	 that	 here	 lay	 Mirza	 Hindal,	 youngest	 and	 beloved	 son	 of	 Babur,	 Moghul	 Emperor	 of
Hindustan.
Gulbadan	had	chosen	the	delicate	tracery	of	irises	and	tulips	that	the	masons	had	carved	round	the
stone’s	edge	and	every	day,	on	Hamida’s	orders,	the	pale	marble	was	sprinkled	with	dried	rose	petals.
She	had	never	forgotten	her	gratitude	to	Hindal	for	saving	Akbar	–	if	anything	it	had	grown	because
Akbar	was	still	their	only	child.	The	hakims	blamed	the	long	and	agonising	labour	she	had	endured
giving	 birth	 to	 him	 and	 had	 predicted	 that	 though	 she	 was	 still	 young	 –	 not	 yet	 twenty-five	 –	 there
would	be	no	more	children.
Turning	away	from	Hindal’s	grave,	Humayun	walked	the	few	paces	to	Babur ’s	simple	tomb.	Every
time	he	came	here,	he	sensed	his	father ’s	presence	so	keenly	he	could	almost	see	him	standing	before
him,	 eyes	 fixed	 understandingly	 upon	 him.	 Babur	 too	 had	 taken	 Kabul	 only	 to	 have	 his	 hopes	 of
advancing	 quickly	 to	 invade	 Hindustan	 disappointed.	 Yet	 there	 was	 a	 profound	 difference	 between
their	 circumstances.	 Babur ’s	 problem	 had	 been	 that	 he	 lacked	 an	 army	 strong	 enough	 to	 take	 on
Sultan	 Ibrahim,	 Hindustan’s	 powerful	 overlord.	 That	 obstacle	 had	 been	 overcome	 when	 his	 friend
Baburi	 had	 brought	 him	 Turkish	 cannon	 and	 matchlocks	 –	 weapons	 then	 unknown	 in	 Hindustan.

Humayun’s	problems	were	more	complex,	more	corrosive,	because	they	came	from	within	his	own
family.	Because	of	Kamran	and	Askari,	Humayun	had	been	forced	to	delay	his	invasion	of	Hindustan
just	when	the	prospects	of	victory	had	seemed	so	good.
The	 chaos	 following	 Sher	 Shah’s	 death	 should	 have	 been	 a	 perfect	 opportunity	 for	 Humayun	 to
invade	 –	 Sher	 Shah’s	 reign	 had	 lasted	 only	 five	 years	 and	 many	 would	 have	 returned	 to	 the	 green
banners	of	the	Moghuls.
Instead,	 the	 threat	 of	 Kamran	 and	 Askari	 had	 made	 it	 impossible	 for	 him	 to	 mount	 a	 prolonged
expedition.	Sher	Shah’s	chiefs	had	had	time	to	rally	and	choose	a	new	emperor.	Rejecting	Sher	Shah’s
elder	son	–	a	man	better	known	for	his	love	of	luxury	than	for	his	military	prowess	–	they	had	elected
his	younger	son,	Islam	Shah,	whose	first	act	had	been	to	order	the	murder	of	his	elder	brother.	The
message	had	not	been	lost	on	Humayun.	If	he	had	executed	Kamran	and	Askari	rather	than	pardoned
them,	then	he,	not	Islam	Shah,	would	have	been	sitting	on	the	throne	in	Agra.
That	 his	 half-brothers	 should	 have	 been	 able	 to	 frustrate	 his	 plans	 for	 so	 long	 hurt	 as	 well	 as
enraged	 Humayun.Where	 was	 their	 gratitude	 for	 his	 mercy?	 Perhaps	 he	 shouldn’t	 be	 surprised	 at
Kamran,	whose	hatred	and	jealousy	of	him	were	seemingly	implacable,	but	why	had	Askari	repaid	his
generosity	with	such	deceit?	When	Askari	had	surrendered	to	him	at	Kandahar,	he	had	seemed	to	feel
remorse,	 even	 shame	 for	 his	 actions.	 Perhaps	 those	 feelings	 had	 been	 genuine	 but	 under	 Kamran’s
influence	hadn’t	lasted.	All	his	life	Askari	had	been	dominated	by	Kamran	.	.	.
Still	brooding,	Humayun	walked	slowly	back	to	where	Jauhar	was	holding	the	reins	of	his	horse
while	it	grazed	the	sweet	grass	beneath	an	apple	tree.	Climbing	into	the	saddle,	Humayun	pushed	the
horse	quickly	back	towards	the	citadel.	He	had	made	a	decision.	Hindal’s	death	had	been	a	sign	that
there	 must	 be	 no	 more	 waiting,	 no	 more	 prevaricating,	 no	 more	 sentimental	 hopes	 that	 his	 halfbrothers	might	still	be	reconciled.	So	far	his	efforts	to	flush	them	from	their	mountain	hideaways	had
been	futile.	Something	more	determined	was	required	.	.	.
That	 night,	 as	 Humayun	 entered	 his	 audience	 chamber,	 he	 found	 his	 commanders	 and	 his
counsellors	 already	 waiting.	 As	 he	 surveyed	 their	 faces,	 there	 was	 one	 man	 he	 still	 instinctively
looked	 for	 –	 Kasim,	 whose	 calm	 commonsense	 and	 absolute	 loyalty	 had	 been	 one	 of	 the	 few
constants	 of	 his	 turbulent	 reign.	 But	 last	 winter,	 crossing	 the	 icy	 courtyard	 Kasim	 had	 slipped	 and
shattered	his	right	hip.	The	hakims	had	sedated	him	with	opium	but	the	shock	to	his	old	body	had	been
too	great.	He	had	slipped	into	unconsciousness	and	two	days	later	passed	away	as	quietly	as	he	had
done	 everything	 in	 life.	 Kasim	 had	 been	 with	 Babur	 from	 the	 first	 precarious	 days	 of	 his	 reign	 as
boy-king	of	Ferghana,	just	as	he	had	always	been	at	Humayun’s	side.	Humayun	had	been	so	used	to
his	calm,	reassuring	presence	and	to	listening	to	his	softly	spoken	and	consistently	valuable	advice.
His	death	had	been	a	true	severing	from	the	past.
But	it	was	the	future	Humayun	needed	to	think	about	now.	Sitting	tall	on	his	throne	he	began.	‘My
patience	 with	 my	 half-brothers	 is	 at	 an	 end.	 They	 will	 always	 be	 a	 danger	 until	 their	 forces	 are
destroyed	and	they	are	caught.’
‘Our	troops	have	been	unlucky	.	.	.	one	day	we	will	succeed	in	taking	them	prisoner,’	said	Zahid
Beg.	He	regarded	the	failure	to	defeat	Kamran	and	Askari	as	a	blemish	on	his	honour.
‘If	we	carry	on	as	at	present	I	doubt	it	–	unless	we	are	very	lucky.	I	have	long	suspected	that	they
have	 spies	 among	 our	 soldiers	 as	 well	 as	 in	 the	 city.	 That	 is	 why	 they	 always	 elude	 us,	 making	 us
waste	time	and	energy	that	would	be	better	spent	elsewhere.’
‘But	what	more	can	we	do?’	asked	Zahid	Beg.
‘That	 is	 why	 I	 have	 summoned	 you	 here.	 Dealing	 with	 Kamran	 and	 Askari	 and	 their	 mountain
raiders	 cannot	 be	 beyond	 us.	 Kabul	 is	 wealthy.	 The	 merchants	 who	 come	 here	 to	 trade	 and	 fill	 our

caravanserais	are	numerous.	The	taxes	they	pay	fill	our	treasury.	I	have	been	preserving	this	wealth
for	my	long-postponed	invasion	of	Hindustan	but	I	intend	to	spend	some	of	it	to	deal	once	and	for	all
with	the	problem	of	my	half-brothers	.	.	.	’
‘How,	Majesty?’	asked	Zahid	Beg.
‘I	will	give	my	own	body	weight	in	gold	to	any	man	who	captures	either	of	my	half-brothers.	We
will	also	redouble	our	own	efforts	–	mobilise	all	our	troops	to	hunt	for	them.	I	will	lead	them	myself.
I	 will	 also	 pay	 large	 sums	 to	 tribesmen	 to	 ride	 with	 us.	 They	 know	 every	 ripple	 and	 fold	 of	 the
mountains.	I	pledge	not	to	rest	until	my	half-brothers	are	caught.’

‘Majesty,	one	of	our	patrols	reports	smoke	rising	from	Karabagh,’	Ahmed	Khan	said,	galloping	up	to
Humayun	and	reining	in	his	white	horse	so	sharply	it	snorted	in	protest.
‘You	think	the	settlement’s	under	attack?’
‘I’m	sure	of	it,	Majesty.’
‘Then	let’s	ride.’	As	his	horse’s	hooves	beat	the	sun-hardened	earth	beneath	a	glaring	orange	sun,
Humayun	allowed	himself	to	hope	that	at	last	he	was	getting	close	to	Kamran	and	Askari.	For	the	past
three	 weeks	 he	 and	 his	 men	 had	 been	 following	 in	 the	 wake	 of	 a	 large	 raiding	 party	 through	 the
mountainous	 valleys	 north	 of	 Kabul,	 always	 arriving	 only	 in	 time	 to	 find	 settlements	 burned,
orchards	hacked	down	and	bodies	already	putrefying	in	the	intense	summer	heat.	But	Karabagh	was
only	about	four	miles	away.	Humayun	remembered	it	well	from	hunting	trips	in	his	youth	–	a	large,
prosperous	place	with	almond	and	apricot	orchards	irrigated	by	a	willow-fringed	stream	flowing	past
the	mud	walls	that	enclosed	it.
The	five	hundred	troops	riding	at	his	back	–	mounted	archers	and	cavalrymen	with	bright,	steeltipped	spears	–	should	be	more	than	enough	to	deal	with	whoever	was	attacking	Karabagh,	he	thought.
As	he	swept	round	the	side	of	a	hill	on	which	a	few	young	oak	trees	had	taken	root,	Karabagh	and	its
orchards	came	into	view.	It	wasn’t	the	peaceful	scene	Humayun	remembered.	Fields	and	orchards	had
been	set	alight	and	through	the	acrid	drifting	smoke	he	saw	that	the	gates	into	the	settlement	had	been
torn	down.	Even	above	the	thundering	of	hooves	he	thought	he	heard	screaming.
‘For	justice!’	Humayun	yelled	and,	circling	Alamgir	above	his	head,	he	urged	his	horse	to	a	gallop,
outstripping	 his	 bodyguards.	 He	 was	 the	 first	 through	 the	 shattered	 gateway	 and	 into	 the	 settlement,
swerving	his	mount	around	the	body	of	an	old	man	from	whose	bloodied	back	a	battleaxe	protruded.
To	 his	 right,	 some	 twenty	 yards	 away,	 Humayun	 saw	 two	 men	 –	 Chakraks	 from	 their	 shaggy,
spherical	 sheep	 wool	 hats	 –	 dragging	 a	 terrified	 girl	 from	 a	 house.	 One	 of	 them	 was	 already
loosening	the	drawstring	of	his	baggy	pantaloons.	Seeing	Humayun	they	gaped.	Letting	go	of	the	girl,
who	scrambled	out	of	the	way,	both	men	reached	for	their	bows	but	Humayun	was	on	them.	With	a
sweep	of	his	sword	he	decapitated	the	first	man,	sending	his	head	spinning	through	the	warm	air	to
smash	against	a	stone	lintel.	Then,	pulling	hard	on	his	reins	and	leaning	back,	he	brought	his	horse	up
on	to	its	back	legs	and	then	urged	it	forward	so	its	front	hooves	smashed	down	on	the	second	Chakrak
with	a	satisfying	crunch	of	bone.
All	around,	his	men,	who	had	poured	into	the	settlement	behind	him,	were	having	the	best	of	the
fight.	 The	 raiders,	 intent	 on	 looting	 and	 raping,	 had	 been	 taken	 completely	 by	 surprise.	 Those	 who

could	 were	 running	 to	 find	 cover.	 But	 all	 Humayun’s	 thoughts	 were	 now	 on	 his	 half-brothers.
Wheeling	his	horse,	he	looked	around	for	them	among	the	heaving,	struggling	mêlée.	‘Majesty,	get
down!’	he	heard	Ahmed	Khan	yell	above	the	shouts,	groans	and	clashing	of	weapons,	and	ducked	just
in	time	to	avoid	a	spear	hurled	at	him	by	a	wild-haired	giant	of	a	man	standing	on	the	flat	roof	of	a
house.	 Humayun	 pulled	 his	 battleaxe	 from	 the	 thongs	 securing	 it	 to	 his	 saddle	 and	 sent	 it	 hurtling
through	the	air.	It	hit	the	man	in	the	chest	so	hard	he	tumbled	backwards	off	the	roof	as	if	struck	by	a
musket	ball.
Humayun’s	blood	was	pounding	in	his	ears.	It	felt	good	to	be	in	the	heart	of	the	fight.	Brushing	the
sweat	 from	 his	 face	 with	 his	 green	 face	 cloth,	 he	 saw	 what	 seemed	 to	 be	 the	 last	 surviving	 raiders
running	 towards	 some	 horses	 tethered	 to	 the	 wooden	 frame	 above	 a	 well.	 ‘Let	 no	 one	 escape,’	 he
yelled	 as,	 pulling	 his	 own	 mount	 round,	 he	 bore	 down	 on	 them.	 Leaning	 forward,	 he	 grabbed	 one
man	 by	 the	 shoulder	 as	 he	 was	 about	 to	 jump	 on	 to	 his	 horse	 and	 with	 a	 violent	 push	 sent	 him
sprawling	to	the	ground.	Reining	in,	Humayun	shouted	at	the	man	as	he	lay	in	the	dust,	‘Whose	men
are	you?	Answer	me	at	once	or	I’ll	put	my	sword	through	your	throat.’	The	man	was	winded	and	still
struggling	to	speak	when	Humayun	heard	a	familiar	voice	behind	him.
‘They	are	mine.	I	surrender.	Let’s	be	done	with	all	this.’
Turning,	Humayun	saw	Askari	standing	about	four	yards	behind	him,	thin	face	streaked	with	blood
from	a	cut	above	his	right	eyebrow.	At	his	feet	were	his	curved	sword	and	a	throwing	dagger.	When
they	saw	what	their	leader	had	done,	Askari’s	remaining	men	also	dropped	their	weapons.
By	 now,	 Humayun’s	 men	 were	 all	 around.	 ‘Tie	 them	 all	 up,’	 he	 ordered.	 Then,	 dismounting,	 he
slowly	approached	Askari.	Puzzlement	at	his	brother ’s	behaviour	and	the	knowledge	of	how	close	he
might	have	come	to	death	at	his	hands	if	Askari	had	used	his	weapons	rather	than	discarding	them,
combined	to	make	him	take	refuge	in	a	simpler	emotion	–	anger.
‘How	dare	you	bring	destruction	and	havoc	to	my	people	–	our	people?’
Askari	said	nothing.
‘You’ve	never	had	the	guts	to	act	alone.	Kamran	must	be	nearby.	Where	is	he?’
Askari	 wiped	 away	 the	 blood	 that	 was	 still	 leaking	 from	 the	 cut	 on	 his	 face.	 ‘You’re	 wrong.	 I
haven’t	seen	Kamran	for	over	five	months.	I	don’t	know	where	he	is.’	His	black	eyes	met	Humayun’s.
Humayun	came	closer	and	dropped	his	voice	so	they	could	not	be	overheard.	‘I	don’t	understand.
You	could	have	attacked	me	from	behind	before	I	even	knew	you	were	there.’
‘Yes.’
‘So	what	stopped	you?’
Askari	 shrugged	 and	 looked	 away.	 Humayun	 gripped	 his	 shoulder.	 ‘You	 don’t	 baulk	 at	 attacking
innocent	people,	allowing	these	vermin’	–	he	gestured	at	a	couple	of	sullen	Chakraks	whom	his	men
had	trussed	up	with	rope	–	‘to	rape	and	murder,	so	why	hesitate	to	attack	your	own	flesh	and	blood	.	.	.
?’
‘Humayun	.	.	.	’
‘No,	now	I	think	about	it,	I’m	not	interested.	It	was	probably	cowardice.You	knew	my	men	would
kill	you	if	you	attacked	me.	I	don’t	want	to	listen	to	any	more	of	your	lies	about	how	sorry	you	are
and	how	everything	that’s	happened	has	been	Kamran’s	fault.’	Humayun	turned	away	and	shouted	to
his	guards,	‘Take	him	away	and	keep	him	from	my	sight	until	we	reach	Kabul.	Just	looking	at	him
shames	me.’

Not	until	ten	days	after	his	return	to	Kabul,	when	the	trees	were	turning	red	and	gold	as	autumn	came,
did	Humayun	finally	have	Askari	brought	before	him	again.	His	words	to	his	men	had	been	the	honest
truth	–	he	was	ashamed	of	his	half-brother,	of	the	depths	to	which	he	had	fallen	and	the	dishonour	it
had	 brought	 to	 their	 family.	 Pallid	 and	 thinner	 than	 ever	 from	 his	 confinement	 in	 the	 common
dungeons,	Askari	shuffled	slowly	into	Humayun’s	private	apartments,	hands	bound,	legs	shackled	and
flanked	by	guards.	‘Leave	us,’	Humayun	ordered	them,	‘but	stay	within	call.’	As	the	double	doors	of
mulberry	wood	closed	behind	them,	Humayun	walked	to	his	gilded	chair,	sat	down,	and	chin	in	hand
looked	Askari	in	the	face.
‘There’s	something	I’ve	never	understood.Twice	I’ve	spared	your	life	though	you	threatened	mine.
More	than	that,	I	invited	you	to	be	not	just	my	brother	but	my	ally	in	my	invasion	of	Hindustan	.	.	.
You	must	think	I’ve	wronged	you,	yet	I	offered	you	everything	.	.	.	’
Askari	slowly	shook	his	head.	‘You	didn’t,’	he	said	in	a	low	voice.	‘All	you	ever	offered	me	and
Kamran	was	a	little	of	your	reflected	glory	–	not	power	and	lands	of	our	own.	I	see	from	your	face
that	you	don’t	understand,	but	for	you	life’s	always	been	about	your	so-called	“great	destiny”.’
‘It’s	not	just	my	destiny	–	it	belongs	to	us	all.’
‘Does	it?	What	about	the	saying	of	our	people,	taktya,	takhta,	“throne	or	coffin”?	That’s	not	about
a	shared	destiny	–	it’s	about	winner	takes	all.	Humayun,	let	us	speak	plainly	–	perhaps	more	honestly
than	we	ever	have	in	all	these	years.	I	don’t	like	you	but	I	don’t	hate	you	.	.	.	I	never	did.	I	was	just
looking	out	for	myself	as	you	would	have	done	in	my	place.’
‘You’re	just	making	excuses	for	thwarted	ambition	and	greed.’
Askari	 looked	 down	 at	 his	 bound	 hands.	 ‘That’s	 what	 you	 call	 it.	 I’d	 say	 it	 was	 a	 desire	 for
independence	–	the	freedom	I’d	have	enjoyed	if	our	father	had	divided	his	territories	fairly	between
his	sons	as	our	ancestors	did.’	He	paused.
‘But	you	didn’t	have	to	betray	me.	Hindal	didn’t.’
At	the	mention	of	Hindal	Askari’s	self-righteous	expression	altered.	‘Hindal	was	different	from	any
of	us.	He	was	as	gentle	as	he	was	big	in	stature.	He	was	without	guile	and	so	naive	that	he	expected
everyone	to	be	as	honourable	as	he	was.	You	lost	a	good	ally	when	you	stole	Hamida	from	him	.	.	.	’
Suddenly	there	were	tears	in	Askari’s	eyes.	‘I	wish	.	.	.	but	what’s	the	point	.	.	.	’
‘What	do	you	wish?’	Humayun	rose	from	his	chair	and	came	so	close	to	Askari	he	could	smell	the
pungent	dankness	of	his	skin	and	clothes	after	his	days	of	confinement.
‘I	wish	I	hadn’t	killed	Hindal.’
‘You?	I	thought	it	must	have	been	Kamran	.	.	.	’
‘It	wasn’t.	It	was	me.’
‘But	why?	How	had	he	injured	you?’
‘I	didn’t	mean	to	kill	him.	It	was	an	accident.	A	cruel	coincidence	of	fate.	I	was	on	a	raid	with	some
of	my	men	on	a	moonless	night.	In	the	darkness	we	encountered	a	small	party	of	fast-moving	riders
who	wouldn’t	halt	or	identify	themselves.	I	shot	an	arrow	at	their	leader	who	tumbled	from	his	saddle
as	the	rest	of	his	men	fled	in	panic.	When	I	looked	at	the	body	I	.	.	.	I	saw	it	was	Hindal	.	.	.	’	Askari
said	dully,	eyes	avoiding	Humayun’s.	‘I	ordered	my	men	to	leave	his	body	outside	the	walls	of	Kabul
where	it	would	be	found	before	wild	beasts	took	it	so	you	could	give	him	a	decent	burial.’
‘I	did.	He	lies	near	our	father	as	he	wanted.’	Humayun	was	still	adjusting	to	the	genuine	remorse	he
saw	on	his	half-brother ’s	face	when	a	thought	struck	him	like	a	shaft	of	light	suddenly	illuminating	a
dark	corner.
‘Hindal	 was	 the	 reason	 you	 surrendered	 when	 you	 did,	 rather	 than	 attacked	 me,	 wasn’t	 he?	 You
might	well	have	been	able	to	kill	me	.	.	.	’

‘Yes.	My	guilt	weighed	on	me.	Everything	felt	so	futile.	I	didn’t	want	to	add	another	brother ’s	death
to	the	burden	of	regret	I	already	carry.’
Humayun	felt	tears	prick	his	own	eyes	as	he	thought	over	Askari’s	tale.	Why	had	Hindal	put	himself
at	risk	by	riding	south	with	only	a	few	men	into	lands	where	he	must	have	known	he	might	encounter
Kamran’s	and	Askari’s	robber	bands?	Was	it	wishful	thinking	to	think	Hindal	might	have	been	on	his
way	to	Kabul	to	seek	a	reconciliation	with	him?	Now	he	would	never	know	.	.	.
For	a	few	moments,	both	brothers	were	silent.	Then	Askari	slowly	crossed	the	room	to	the	window
and	 looked	 down	 into	 the	 courtyard.	 As	 he	 did	 so	 a	 half-smile	 crossed	 his	 face.	 ‘When	 we	 were
children,	Hindal	and	I	used	to	stand	here	sometimes	while	the	guards	drilled	in	the	courtyard.	At	other
times	we	watched	you	and	Kamran	learning	to	fight	with	dagger	and	sword.	We	were	very	impressed
–	compared	with	us	you	seemed	like	grown	men,	warriors	.	.	.	We	also	watched	our	father	ride	out	on
his	 invasion	 of	 Hindustan	 from	 here.	 We’d	 never	 seen	 anything	 like	 it	 –	 so	 many	 thousands	 of
soldiers,	so	many	baggage	wagons	assembled	in	the	meadows	below	the	citadel,	so	much	noise	and
excitement	 in	 the	 early	 morning	 light.	 Hindal	 was	 yelling	 with	 excitement	 though	 he	 didn’t	 really
understand	what	was	happening	.	.	.	Humayun	.	.	.	’
‘What?’
‘Do	you	intend	to	execute	me?’
‘Probably	not.’
Askari	closed	his	eyes	for	a	moment.	‘In	that	case,	help	me	find	a	way	to	make	peace	with	myself
and	with	the	past	.	.	.	’
‘How	can	I	do	that?’
‘Let	me	make	the	journey	to	Mecca,	the	haj.	I	want	to	atone	for	what	happened	to	Hindal	.	.	.	’
‘You	want	to	make	the	pilgrimage	to	Mecca?’	Why	not,	Humayun	thought	after	a	moment	or	two.
Making	the	haj	would	take	Askari	nearly	a	thousand	miles	from	Kabul	and	from	Kamran	for	months
–	years	even.	It	was	a	better	solution	than	incarceration	or	exile	and	might	even	provide	Askari	with
the	spiritual	comfort	he	seemed	in	such	need	of.	‘Are	you	certain	this	is	what	you	want?’
Askari	nodded.
‘Then	 I	 will	 send	 an	 escort	 with	 you	 under	 the	 command	 of	 one	 of	 my	 best	 young	 officers,
Mohamed	Azruddin.’
‘To	spy	on	me?’	Askari	smiled	bleakly.
‘No.	To	protect	you	–	it	is	a	long	and	hazardous	journey	by	sea	as	well	as	by	land	.	.	.	You	may	not
believe	me	but	I	wish	things	could	have	been	different	between	us.	It	is	too	late	for	that	now	–	the	past
will	always	lie	between	us	–	but	I	pray	that	you	find	the	peace	you	are	seeking.’

Chapter	22
Kamran	Padishah
One	clear	early	spring	morning,	five	months	after	Askari’s	departure	on	his	long	journey	to	Mecca,
Humayun	stood	at	the	stone	casement	of	his	apartments	in	his	fortress	palace	overlooking	Kabul	and
gazed	 towards	 the	 mountains	 to	 the	 south.	 Although	 there	 had	 been	 no	 falls	 for	 some	 weeks,	 their
jagged	peaks	were	still	snow-capped.	The	winds	were	chill	and	Humayun	pulled	his	fur-lined	cloak
tightly	round	him.	Few	travellers	made	the	journey	up	through	the	passes	from	Hindustan	at	this	time
of	year	but	as	Humayun	watched,	a	small	caravan	appeared	round	the	bend	of	the	road	that	led	south
to	Hindustan.
As	the	caravan	got	closer,	Humayun	saw	that	it	comprised	a	few	horsemen,	no	more	than	twenty	–
presumably	merchants	and	their	attendants	–	and	about	twenty	or	thirty	pack	camels.	The	riders	were
all	well	protected	against	the	cold	by	heavy	sheepskin	jackets	and	most	had	scarves	wound	round	their
faces.	 The	 camels’	 warm	 breath	 hung	 in	 the	 cold	 air	 as	 they	 plodded	 slowly	 up	 the	 hill	 under	 the
burden	 of	 heavy	 panniers	 crammed	 with	 trade	 goods	 strapped	 on	 either	 side	 of	 their	 bodies,	 and
headed	towards	one	of	the	caravanserais	that	clustered	just	inside	the	thick	walls	of	the	city.	After	ten
minutes,	 the	 caravan	 disappeared	 from	 view	 through	 the	 city	 gates	 into	 the	 caravanserai.	 Shortly
afterwards,	 Humayun	 saw	 the	 smoke	 of	 extra	 fires	 lit	 to	 warm	 and	 feed	 the	 newcomers	 rise	 from
within	its	walls.
Thinking	no	more	about	the	caravan,	Humayun	looked	down	into	the	courtyard	of	the	fort	where
Bairam	Khan	was	teaching	the	ten-year-old	Akbar	some	of	the	finer	points	of	swordplay,	watched	by
Akbar ’s	 milk-brother	 Adham	 Khan.	 Akbar	 –	 a	 strong,	 muscular	 boy	 for	 his	 age	 –	 was	 clearly
perfecting	 a	 technique	 for	 parrying	 Bairam	 Khan’s	 thrusts.	 Dodging	 beneath	 his	 tutor ’s	 shield,	 he
stabbed	the	protective	quilted	padding	worn	for	such	training	sessions	with	his	blunted	sword.
As	 Akbar	 and	 Bairam	 Khan	 paused	 for	 breath,	 Humayun	 saw	 a	 man	 wearing	 a	 heavy	 sheepskin
jacket,	his	face	muffled	beneath	a	red	woollen	cloth,	enter	the	courtyard.	He	spoke	urgently	to	one	of
the	 numerous	 guards,	 who	 pointed	 first	 to	 the	 officers’	 quarters	 and	 then	 to	 Humayun’s	 own
apartments.	Ten	minutes	later,	Humayun	heard	a	knock	on	the	door	and	Jauhar	entered.	‘Majesty,	one
of	Ahmed	Khan’s	spies	has	arrived,	bringing	news	from	the	south.	Ahmed	Khan	seeks	your	urgent
permission	to	bring	him	into	your	presence	to	report	in	person.	They	are	outside.’
‘Let	them	come	in.’
Moments	later,	the	familiar,	straggle-bearded	figure	of	Ahmed	Khan	appeared.	Behind	him	was	the
man	in	the	sheepskin	Humayun	had	seen	in	the	courtyard.	He	had	removed	his	red	scarf	and	headgear
to	 reveal	 a	 stubbly	 beard	 and	 thinning	 dark	 hair,	 both	 of	 which	 made	 him	 appear	 older	 than	 he
probably	was.	Ahmed	Khan	and	the	newcomer	bowed	low.
‘What	is	it,	Ahmed	Khan?’
‘This	is	Hussein	Kalil	–	one	of	our	best	and	most	trusted	scouts.	He	has	just	returned	from	the	south
around	Khowst.’
‘He	was	with	the	caravan	that	I	just	saw	arrive,	wasn’t	he?	He	clearly	brings	important	news	if	he

has	come	to	us	so	soon	after	his	arrival,	without	even	stopping	for	a	bowl	of	soup	or	to	warm	himself
before	the	fires	just	lit	in	the	caravanserai.’
‘It	 is	 important	 news	 –	 serious	 too.	 Your	 half-brother	 Kamran	 is	 raising	 yet	 another	 rebellion,
collecting	forces	south	of	Khowst.’
Humayun	 grimaced.	 This	 was	 news	 he	 had	 half	 expected	 to	 hear	 but	 had	 hoped	 not	 to.	 After
Hindal’s	death	and	Askari’s	departure	on	his	pilgrimage,	Kamran	seemed	to	have	disappeared	from
the	face	of	the	earth	despite	the	most	extensive	searches	by	Humayun’s	troops.	Humayun	had	tried	to
convince	 himself	 that	 Kamran	 had	 decided	 that	 he	 too	 should	 abandon	 the	 struggle	 and	 retreated	 to
some	remote	area	or	sought	exile,	leaving	Humayun	freer	than	he	had	ever	been	since	he	had	lost	the
throne	of	Hindustan	to	focus	all	his	efforts	and	all	his	resources	on	recovering	it.
However,	 in	 his	 heart	 Humayun	 had	 known	 all	 along	 that	 Kamran	 had	 always	 been	 the	 most
resolute	and	determined	of	his	fraternal	foes	and	was	unlikely	ever	to	desist	from	his	rebellions	and
liberate	Humayun	for	the	reconquest	of	Hindustan.	There	could	be	no	peace,	no	truce	between	them.
Kamran	 had	 never	 lost	 a	 deep-seated	 resentment	 fuelled	 by	 his	 belief	 that	 Humayun’s	 five-month
advantage	in	age	alone	had	led	Babur	to	give	him	all.	Perhaps	he	even	felt	that	Babur	had	loved	the
unworthy	Humayun	more	than	himself	–	probably	his	mother	Gulrukh	had	encouraged	him	in	such	a
belief.	Humayun	could	not	be	certain	of	any	of	this,	but	he	knew	he	must	act	against	his	half-brother
once	more	and	this	time	put	an	end	to	his	threat	for	ever.	‘Whereabouts	exactly	is	Kamran?’
‘On	 the	 borders	 of	 our	 Afghan	 territories	 and	 those	 of	 the	 Baluchis,’	 Ahmed	 Khan	 replied.	 ‘The
high	mountains,	secluded	valleys	and	remote	caves	provide	good	hiding	places	for	all	sorts	of	rebels
and	bandits	and	are	almost	impregnable	to	those	who	do	not	have	local	supporters.	But	may	Hussein
Kalil	tell	his	own	story?’
‘Of	course.’
Hussein	Kalil	shuffled	from	foot	to	foot	and,	eyes	on	the	ground,	began	slightly	nervously,	gaining
in	confidence	as	he	went	on.
‘Under	 Ahmed	 Khan’s	 orders	 I	 was	 travelling	 in	 the	 south,	 in	 the	 guise	 of	 an	 itinerant	 seller	 of
medicine	–	I	have	some	knowledge	of	the	subject.	I	was	nearing	Khowst	when	I	heard	rumours	that
your	half-brother	had	taken	refuge	in	a	hill	fortress	about	fifty	miles	away.	I	determined	to	go	there
and	set	out	along	the	steep,	stony	tracks,	over	the	numerous	passes	and	small,	twisting,	fast-flowing
rivers.	As	I	got	nearer	to	my	destination,	I	noticed	how	full	the	wayside	resting	places	and	the	chai
khanas	 –	 the	 tea	 houses	 –	 were.	 Nearly	 all	 their	 customers	 were	 travelling	 in	 the	 same	 direction	 as
myself.	Most	were	well	armed	and	strongly	built.	It	took	little	effort	to	deduce	that	they	were	on	their
way	to	join	your	brother ’s	force	and	indeed	some	were	ready	enough	to	tell	me	so.	Nevertheless,	I
decided	to	see	the	fortress	for	myself	and	to	confirm	the	presence	of	your	brother	Kamran	and	the
number	of	his	men	before	returning.’
‘What	did	you	find	when	you	got	there?’
‘When	I	reached	Kamran’s	stronghold	after	a	few	days	more,	I	discovered	it	was,	in	fact,	a	small
fortified	village	at	the	head	of	a	narrow	valley,	high	in	the	hills.	Its	mud	walls	were	tall	and	thick	and
around	them	was	a	cluster	of	felt	tents,	housing	recruits	such	as	those	I’d	seen	along	the	way.	Trusting
in	my	disguise	as	a	medicine	seller	I	entered	the	iron-studded	gates	in	the	walls	and	made	my	way	to
the	small	market	place.	Stalls	edged	its	sides,	selling	vegetables	and	the	like,	but	in	the	centre	a	stout
man	–	clearly	an	officer	–	was	inspecting	a	line	of	potential	recruits	and	their	mounts,	prodding	the
men	in	the	walls	of	their	stomachs	to	check	their	muscles,	testing	the	sharpness	of	their	weapons	and
examining	the	teeth	and	legs	of	their	horses.	Before	he	had	got	a	third	of	the	way	down	the	line,	your
half-brother	 rode	 up	 on	 a	 tall	 ginger	 horse	 with	 some	 of	 his	 men	 and	 called	 the	 recruits	 to	 gather

around	 him.	 As	 a	 brief	 flurry	 of	 snow	 fell,	 sprinkling	 everybody	 and	 everything	 with	 white,	 he
addressed	them.’
‘What	did	he	say?’
‘Forgive	me,	Majesty.	I	am	not	sure	I	should	repeat	his	harsh	words,	for	they	concerned	you.’
‘Go	on.	The	words	will	be	his	not	yours,	and	I	will	hear	them.’
‘They	 went	 something	 like	 this:	 “My	 half-brother,	 the	 emperor,	 is	 a	 weak,	 indecisive	 man,	 not
worthy	 to	 rule.	 Despite	 his	 protestations	 he	 remains	 addicted	 to	 opium.	 It	 makes	 him	 sluggish	 and
hesitant.	He	has	had	many	opportunities	to	regain	the	throne	of	Hindustan	but	failed	to	grasp	them.	I	–
not	he	–	have	the	true	hunger	for	land	and	booty	that	inspired	Babur,	my	father.	Be	loyal	to	me	and	I
will	bring	you	great	reward.”’
Humayun	tensed	and	clenched	his	fist.	How	typical	of	the	devious	Kamran	to	spice	his	lies	with	a
grain	of	truth.	Yes,	he	had	sometimes	again	resorted	to	the	solace	of	opium	as	relief	from	the	aching
disappointment	 of	 his	 failure	 to	 make	 progress	 in	 the	 recovery	 of	 Hindustan.	 But	 the	 cause	 of	 that
failure	was	Kamran	himself	and	his	constant	rebellions.	Humayun	controlled	himself.	‘How	did	the
men	react?’
‘They	 cheered	 him	 and	 he	 beckoned	 to	 one	 of	 those	 accompanying	 him,	 who	 produced	 a	 large
green	 leather	 purse.	 Your	 brother	 extracted	 some	 silver	 coins	 and	 gave	 five	 to	 each	 man,	 saying,
“These	 are	 mere	 tokens	 of	 the	 rewards	 you	 will	 gain.”	 Eyes	 shining	 with	 greed,	 they	 roared	 out
“Kamran	Padishah!	We	will	follow	you	to	the	death.”’
‘That	will	be	a	short	journey.	If	they	and	Kamran	persist	in	their	rebellion	they	will	surely	die.	But
continue.’
‘I	remained	at	the	settlement	for	four	days,	talking	to	the	recruits	and	spying	on	their	preparations
for	war.	One	white-haired	officer	who	was	suffering	badly	from	chilblains	for	which	I	prescribed	a
mustard	patch	that	–	I	thank	God	–	seemed	to	help	him,	told	me	that	they	were	to	begin	their	march	on
Kabul	 in	 a	 week.	 I	 waited	 no	 longer	 but	 retraced	 my	 steps.	 Ten	 days	 ago,	 for	 protection	 against
bandits	and	lawless	tribes,	I	joined	the	caravan	that	arrived	today.’
‘You	have	done	well,	Hussein	Kalil.	Ahmed	Khan,	send	scouts	to	check	for	signs	of	my	brother ’s
approach.’
‘I	have	done	so	already,	Majesty.’
Within	 half	 an	 hour,	 Humayun	 was	 surrounded	 by	 his	 military	 advisers	 in	 an	 inner	 room	 of	 the
citadel	 warmed	 by	 a	 great	 log	 fire.	 Humayun	 spoke	 first,	 summarising	 what	 Hussein	 Kalil	 had
reported	and	then	went	on,	anger	in	his	eyes	and	a	steely	determination	in	his	voice,	‘I	will	brook	no
more	of	my	half-brother ’s	disloyalty.	Provided	the	scouts	confirm	his	advance	I	propose	to	ride	out
to	confront	him	before	he	nears	Kabul,	perhaps	taking	him	unawares	in	the	passes.’	He	paused,	then
asked,	‘Bairam	Khan,	how	many	men	can	we	muster	quickly?’
‘Around	 four	 thousand,	 Majesty.	 It’s	 good	 that	 we’d	 already	 started	 recruiting	 among	 the	 tribes
around	Kabul	for	the	probing	campaign	towards	the	Indus	you	are	contemplating.’
‘Will	the	recruits	remain	loyal?	Those	tribes	are	fractious	and	rent	by	feuds.’
‘We	believe	so,	Majesty.	As	you	know,	we	gave	them	a	bounty	on	recruitment	and	promised	more
after	each	victory.’
‘Good.	We	will	march	in	five	days.’
Four	days	later	–	preparations	had	taken	less	time	than	Humayun	had	originally	thought	–	he	rode
on	 his	 black	 horse	 down	 the	 stone	 ramp	 of	 the	 citadel	 of	 Kabul	 to	 the	 parade	 ground	 on	 the	 plain
below	where	his	army	of	four	thousand	men	had	assembled,	pennants	flying	in	the	stiff	chill	breeze.
As	 Humayun	 took	 his	 place	 in	 the	 centre	 of	 the	 column,	 he	 reflected	 that	 although	 they	 were	 many

fewer	than	the	troops	he	had	once	deployed	in	Hindustan,	they	should	be	more	than	enough	to	defeat
Kamran.	Nearly	all	his	men	were	mounted	and	while	he	had	decided,	for	speed	of	movement,	not	to
take	cannon	with	him,	many	of	his	soldiers	had	six-foot-long	muskets	tied	to	their	saddles.	Others	had
bows	and	quivers	full	of	arrows	across	their	backs.
Ahmed	Khan’s	spies	had	confirmed	that	Kamran	was	indeed	on	the	move	and	that	by	now	he	should
be	no	more	than	ten	days	away	from	Kabul,	advancing	up	the	long	defile	through	the	Safed	mountain
range.	Because	the	campaign	would	be	short	–	they	might	expect	to	clash	in	battle	in	less	than	a	week
–	Humayun	had	ordered	the	provisions	and	equipment	they	carried	to	be	kept	to	a	minimum.	Most	of
it	–	like	the	felt	tents	to	keep	out	the	late	frosts,	the	copper	cooking	pots	and	the	sacks	of	rice	–	was
loaded	in	wicker	panniers	strapped	on	the	backs	of	camels.The	rest	was	carried	by	the	lines	of	pack
horses	and	mules	waiting,	roped	together	and	restive,	at	the	rear	of	the	column.
Once	 arrived	 among	 his	 officers,	 Humayun	 waved	 to	 his	 trumpeters	 to	 sound	 their	 long	 brass
trumpets	 and	 to	 his	 drummers	 to	 beat	 out	 their	 martial	 tattoo	 on	 the	 drums	 slung	 on	 either	 side	 of
their	horses.	This	was	the	signal	for	the	column	to	move	off,	which	it	did	with	a	jangling	of	harness
and	neighing	of	horses	and	the	foul-breathed	snorting	of	the	haughty-looking	camels.

Late	in	the	afternoon	of	the	third	day,	as	the	sun	was	dropping	low	over	the	jagged	mountains	lining
the	valley	as	it	descended	to	the	south,	Humayun	was	discussing	with	his	officers	where	best	to	make
camp	 for	 the	 night	 when	 Ahmed	 Khan	 cantered	 up.	 A	 white-haired	 man	 with	 a	 weather-beaten	 face
was	riding	by	his	side.	Humayun	saw	he	was	guiding	his	long-haired	mountain	pony	with	only	one
hand	 and	 that	 the	 bottom	 of	 the	 right	 sleeve	 of	 his	 brown	 wool	 jacket	 flapped	 empty.	 The	 old	 man
dismounted	with	surprising	agility	and	bowed	to	Humayun.
‘Majesty,’	Ahmed	Khan	began,	‘this	is	Wazim	Pathan.When	one	of	our	scouts	entered	his	village	he
asked	to	be	brought	here.	He	claims	he	was	one	of	three	soldiers	you	rewarded	in	front	of	the	whole
army	before	the	battle	of	Kanauj.	He	had	lost	his	hand	and	lower	arm	in	a	skirmish	with	Sher	Shah’s
advancing	troops	and	you	discharged	him	to	return	home	with	a	bag	of	coin.	As	proof	he	showed	me
this.’	Ahmed	Khan	produced	a	faded	red	velvet	bag	with	the	mark	of	the	Moghul	empire	embroidered
upon	it.
‘I	remember	both	the	occasion	and	you,	Wazim	Pathan,	well.	The	years	have	been	kind	to	you	and	I
am	glad	to	see	you.’
‘Majesty,	I	have	told	Ahmed	Khan	that	I	wish	to	repay	some	little	portion	of	the	debt	of	gratitude	I
owe	you.	Over	the	years,	I	have	become	the	headman	of	my	small	village	in	a	side	valley	off	the	main
track	only	two	miles	from	here.	I	was	born	and	brought	up	in	these	mountains	you	see	around	you
and	I	know	all	the	paths.	There	is	one	which	climbs	up	through	the	scree	slopes	behind	my	village	and
then	winds	between	tumbled	rocks	to	a	position	high	above	this	main	valley	road	along	which	your
traitorous	half-brother	must	pass.	From	those	heights	you	could	ambush	him,	shooting	his	men	down
and	attacking	him	in	the	rear.’
Humayun	 had	 no	 doubt	 that	 Wazim	 Pathan	 was	 telling	 the	 truth.	 ‘We	 will	 halt	 tonight	 near	 your
village	and	in	the	early	morning	explore	the	paths	you	suggest.	Now	we	must	hurry	if	we’re	to	make
camp	before	darkness	falls	completely.’

Wazim	 Pathan	 had	 begged	 Humayun	 to	 use	 his	 small	 windowless	 flat-roofed	 mud	 house,	 with	 its
central	 fireplace	 vented	 by	 a	 hole	 in	 the	 roof,	 as	 his	 temporary	 headquarters.	 To	 honour	 his	 old
soldier,	Humayun	had	agreed,	although	he	had	slept	in	his	usual	tent	erected	under	Jauhar ’s	watchful
eye	within	the	low	walls	of	Wazim	Pathan’s	compound.	Just	before	first	light,	Ahmed	Khan	and	some
of	his	men	had	departed	to	check	the	practicality	of	Wazim	Pathan’s	proposed	route	for	an	army	the
size	of	theirs.	Now,	just	after	the	sun	had	reached	its	zenith,	Humayun	could	see	them	returning,	their
horses	 zigzagging	 their	 way	 down	 tracks	 through	 the	 grey	 scree-strewn	 slope	 of	 the	 nearest	 of	 the
mountains.
‘Majesty,’	reported	Ahmed	Khan	when,	three-quarters	of	an	hour	later,	Humayun	and	his	military
commanders	 sat	 around	 the	 fire	 in	 Wazim	 Pathan’s	 humble	 home,	 sometimes	 coughing	 as	 gusts	 of
wind	blew	smoke	back	into	the	room	through	the	hole	in	the	roof,	‘it	is	indeed	possible	to	get	armed
men	along	the	paths	Wazim	Pathan	has	shown	us,	though	not	all	the	army	could	go	that	way.	The	track
leads	 to	 a	 position	 overlooking	 the	 valley	 just	 where	 it	 narrows	 into	 a	 defile.	 It	 is	 ideally	 suited	 to
ambushing	your	half-brother ’s	men.’
‘What	do	our	scouts	who	are	shadowing	Kamran’s	troops	report	about	their	progress?’
‘They	should	pass	below	the	ambush	position	around	midday	the	day	after	tomorrow.’
‘Then,’	said	Humayun,	putting	an	end	to	any	further	debate,	‘my	mind	is	made	up.	We	will	take	six
hundred	of	our	best	men	including	most	of	our	musketeers	up	into	the	ambush	place.	Zahid	Beg,	you
will	select	who	will	come.	Tell	them	to	take	not	only	their	arms	but	also	animals’	skins	and	blankets	to
keep	them	warm	in	the	night	we	must	spend	up	there	as	well	as	enough	water	and	cold	food	for	two
days.	We	will	light	no	fires	either	for	warmth	or	for	cooking	in	case	they	reveal	our	position.	The
rest	of	our	men	will	remain	here	under	your	command,	Bairam	Khan,	to	barricade	the	main	road	to
block	the	way	of	any	of	Kamran’s	men	who	are	left	alive	and	try	to	flee	north	along	the	road	towards
Kabul.’
Next	morning,	beneath	a	clear	blue	sky	and	with	Wazim	Pathan	on	his	tough	pony	and	Ahmed	Khan
on	his	usual	brown	mare	at	his	side,	Humayun	rode	out	from	Wazim	Pathan’s	small	village	towards
the	nearby	mountain	and	the	track	leading	upward	through	its	scree	slopes.	After	an	hour,	he	and	the
front	 of	 the	 column	 had	 reached	 the	 area	 of	 jumbled,	 tumbled	 boulders	 and	 began	 slowly	 and	 in
single	file	picking	their	way	upwards	through	them	and	across	gullies	in	which	snow	had	collected
and	frozen.	At	the	end	of	another	hour	and	a	half,	Wazim	Pathan	pointed	to	a	ridge	about	half	a	mile
ahead.	 ‘Majesty,	 over	 that	 ridge	 lies	 the	 main	 road	 that	 runs	 south	 from	 Kabul	 –	 the	 one	 that	 your
brother	will	come	up.’
Humayun	 and	 Ahmed	 Khan	 followed	 Wazim	 Pathan	 as,	 with	 his	 single	 hand,	 he	 guided	 his	 pony
through	more	rocks	and	boulders	towards	the	crest	of	the	ridge.	Once	on	the	top,	which	still	had	a
thick	covering	of	frozen	snow,	Humayun	could	see	that	it	afforded	a	great	vantage	point	over	the	road
and	that	the	rocks	lower	down	were	ideal	to	conceal	musketeers	to	fire	upon	any	unsuspecting	army
advancing	towards	Kabul.
Humayun	spoke.	‘The	musketeers	will	have	to	eat	and	sleep	in	those	rocks	just	in	case	Kamran	and
his	men	arrive	earlier	than	we	expect.	Ahmed	Khan,	give	orders	for	them	to	take	up	their	positions
immediately,	carrying	with	them	their	bedding	and	provisions	as	well	as	their	weapons.	But	what	of
the	 rest	 of	 us,Wazim	 Pathan?	 Is	 there	 any	 flat	 ground	 nearby	 where	 we	 could	 bivouac	 before
exploring	 further	 along	 the	 ridge?	 We	 need	 to	 find	 a	 place	 from	 which	 to	 sally	 down	 to	 take

Kamran’s	men	in	the	rear	so	we	can	drive	them	forward	under	our	musketeers’	fire.’
‘Yes,	 Majesty.	 There	 is	 a	 flat	 area	 of	 land	 in	 the	 lee	 of	 the	 ridge	 about	 three-quarters	 of	 a	 mile
further	on	where	we	could	camp.	From	there	I	will	guide	you	along	a	path	which	descends	towards	a
place	where	the	scree	slopes	more	gently	to	the	road	and	it	would	be	possible	for	skilled	horsemen	to
charge	straight	down	rather	than	having	to	zigzag.’
In	 the	 deep	 cold	 of	 the	 next	 morning	 an	 hour	 before	 dawn,	 as	 Humayun	 was	 slapping	 his	 arms
against	his	sides	to	warm	himself	and	readying	himself	for	the	day	ahead,	Ahmed	Khan	reported	to
him	that	one	of	the	musketeers	who	had	been	stationed	in	a	particularly	exposed	position	overlooking
the	road	had	died	of	cold.	‘He	deserved	to	die,’	was	Ahmed	Khan’s	unsympathetic	explanation.	‘He
brought	spirits	not	water	to	drink	and	not	enough	bedding.’
‘Are	the	other	musketeers	awake	and	alert?’
‘Yes,	Majesty.’
‘Are	they	in	position	and	have	they	checked	their	weapons?’
‘Again	yes,	Majesty.’
‘Good.	Now	have	the	remaining	men	mount	up.	As	soon	as	it’s	light	enough	we’ll	make	our	way
along	 the	 track	 I	 explored	 yesterday	 afternoon	 with	 Wazim	 Pathan	 to	 what	 is	 indeed	 an	 ideal
launching	 point	 for	 our	 attack	 on	 Kamran’s	 rear.	 The	 path	 is	 narrow	 and	 icy	 with	 steep	 drops	 in
places.	Tell	our	men	to	take	care,	particularly	as	the	wind	is	rising.’
An	hour	later,	Humayun,	his	face	numb	despite	his	woollen	face	cloth	from	the	cold	wind	blowing
from	the	north,	had	just	traversed	the	narrowest	part	of	the	route,	which	was	less	than	two	feet	wide
with	precipitous	drops	on	both	sides,	when	he	heard	a	cry	from	behind,	followed	by	a	thud	and	then	a
second	heavier	one	from	below.	Turning	in	his	saddle,	he	saw	that	one	of	the	riders	following	him
had	fallen	from	the	ridge	together	with	his	mount,	perhaps	caught	by	one	of	the	increasingly	frequent
heavy	 gusts	 of	 wind.The	 man’s	 sheepskin-jacketed	 body	 was	 spread-eagled	 on	 a	 ledge	 only	 about
thirty	 feet	 below	 but	 the	 horse	 had	 landed	 much	 lower	 down	 among	 jagged	 rocks	 which	 had
penetrated	its	body	and	spilled	its	intestines.
As	Humayun	watched,	another	rider	and	his	horse	toppled	from	the	track,	crashing	down	to	land
among	 the	 jagged	 grey	 rocks.	 Humayun	 spoke	 urgently.	 ‘Pass	 the	 word	 back.	 Any	 man	 who	 is
uncertain	either	of	himself	or	of	his	horse	should	dismount	and	lead	his	animal	across	the	narrowest
and	most	exposed	stretch.	There	is	no	shame	in	that.’
After	that,	all	of	Humayun’s	men	got	over	safely,	except	one	whose	bay	horse	stumbled	on	the	ice
as	 he	 led	 it	 across.	 The	 animal	 fell,	 hooves	 flailing	 at	 thin	 air,	 pulling	 its	 rider	 –	 a	 small,	 blackbearded	Badakhshani	–	with	it	as,	desperately	trying	to	steady	it,	he	failed	to	let	go	of	the	reins	before
he	too	overbalanced	and	plunged	from	the	path.
Half	an	hour	later,	Humayun	and	his	men	had	concealed	themselves	and	their	horses	as	best	they
could	among	the	jumbled	rocks	at	the	top	of	the	slope	of	pewter-grey	scree	down	which	they	intended
to	charge	to	ambush	Kamran’s	men.	Humayun	knew	they	would	have	some	hours	to	wait.	The	very
latest	scouting	report	to	reach	him	indicated	that	Kamran’s	troops	might	not	get	to	this	point	until	two
or	 even	 three	 o’clock	 in	 the	 afternoon.	 It	 would	 leave	 little	 time	 to	 draw	 any	 battle	 to	 a	 decisive
conclusion	before	the	early	sundown.
In	fact,	it	was	a	little	after	three	when	Humayun	himself	peering,	eyes	narrowed	in	concentration,
from	 behind	 a	 large	 boulder,	 was	 the	 first	 to	 spot	 Kamran’s	 vanguard	 ascending	 the	 road.	 They
seemed	to	have	no	scouts	or	pickets	posted	and	not	to	be	keeping	any	formal	order.	Clearly,	they	had
no	suspicion	of	ambush.	Humayun	motioned	Ahmed	Khan	to	him.	‘Pass	the	message	to	the	men	not	to
attack	until	I	give	the	signal.	It’ll	be	a	little	while	until	enough	of	the	column	has	passed	by	for	us	to	be

able	to	charge	down	on	their	rear.	When	we	do,	it	must	be	hard	and	fast,	leaving	Kamran	no	chance	to
rally	his	men.’
For	perhaps	a	quarter	of	an	hour	Humayun	waited	as	Kamran’s	men	continued	to	advance,	chatting
and	 laughing	 as	 they	 rode.	 During	 that	 time	 Humayun	 thought	 he	 saw	 his	 half-brother	 riding	 a
chestnut	horse	in	the	centre	of	the	column	but	at	such	a	distance	he	could	not	be	sure.	When	the	last
element	 of	 the	 rearguard	 and	 the	 straggle	 of	 camp	 followers	 were	 making	 their	 way	 beneath	 his
hiding	place,	Humayun	signalled	his	men	to	mount.	Immediately	they	had	done	so,	with	a	wave	of	his
gauntleted	hand	he	set	his	four	hundred	riders	in	motion.	Together	they	charged	down	the	scree	slope.
Although	less	precipitous	than	elsewhere,	the	descent	was	still	steep	and	as	Humayun	rode	down,
leaning	back	in	his	saddle	to	help	his	horse	keep	its	balance,	he	saw	one	of	his	men’s	horses	lose	its
footing	and	fall	headlong,	catapulting	its	rider	over	its	neck	and	rolling	over	and	over	down	through
the	 loose,	 powdery	 scree.	 However,	 almost	 instantly,	 Humayun	 and	 his	 men	 were	 among	 Kamran’s
rearguard,	 striking	 and	 slashing	 around	 them.	 In	 the	 first	 minute	 of	 the	 attack,	 Humayun	 felled	 a
black-turbaned	rider	from	his	saddle	as	he	struggled	to	free	his	sword	from	its	scabbard	beneath	his
sheepskin.	He	wounded	another	in	the	thigh	before	he	too	could	raise	a	weapon	and	inflicted	a	deep
sword	cut	on	a	third’s	arm.
Kamran’s	 horsemen	 seemed	 taken	 completely	 by	 surprise.	 The	 hindmost	 of	 them	 surged
instinctively	forward	away	from	their	attackers,	crashing	into	their	comrades	in	front	and,	as	they	did
so,	 panicking	 their	 horses	 and	 in	 turn	 propelling	 them	 onwards	 up	 the	 valley	 road.	 Soon	 Humayun
heard	 the	 first	 musket	 shots	 from	 the	 boulders	 high	 on	 the	 hillside	 where	 his	 musketeers	 were
concealed.	From	his	position	within	the	crush	and	dust	of	battle,	Humayun	could	not	see	their	direct
effect,	but	he	could	see	confusion	and	surprise	turning	to	absolute	panic	and	fear	around	him.
Some	 of	 Kamran’s	 men	 tried	 to	 turn	 their	 rearing	 horses	 and	 force	 them	 back	 through	 their
attackers,	 to	 return	 south	 and	 away	 from	 the	 musket	 fire.	 None	 succeeded;	 all	 were	 either	 killed	 or
felled	from	their	horses.	Others	tried	to	ride	up	the	steep	scree	slopes.	Humayun	saw	some	of	these
topple	 from	 the	 saddle,	 presumably	 shot	 down	 by	 his	 musketeers.	 Within	 twenty	 minutes,	 cohesion
and	 discipline	 in	 Kamran’s	 ragtag	 army	 was	 evaporating.	 Pockets	 of	 his	 desperate,	 frightened	 men
were	dismounting,	throwing	down	their	weapons	and	raising	their	hands	above	their	heads	in	token	of
surrender.
Gathering	 some	 of	 his	 own	 troops	 around	 him,	 Humayun	 pushed	 his	 black	 horse	 through
Kamran’s	 disintegrating	 army	 in	 search	 of	 his	 brother,	 striking	 left	 and	 right	 as	 he	 did	 so.	 But	 he
could	not	find	Kamran.	Once	he	thought	he	saw	him	on	his	chestnut	horse,	but	as	he	swerved	closer
he	 realised	 that	 the	 rider	 was	 in	 fact	 a	 younger	 man,	 probably	 an	 officer,	 who	 quickly	 kicked	 his
horse	to	escape	but	not	quickly	enough	to	prevent	Humayun’s	sword	slicing	into	his	helmetless	head
and	splitting	it	like	a	ripe	watermelon.
Shouts	 from	 the	 north	 where	 his	 main	 force	 under	 Bairam	 Khan	 would	 have	 engaged	 Kamran’s
fleeing	 men	 from	 behind	 the	 barricades	 showed	 that	 the	 fight	 had	 been	 joined	 there	 too.	 Unable	 to
distinguish	clearly	enough	between	friend	and	foe	in	the	mass	of	fighters	below,	and	with	their	sight
partially	obscured	by	smoke	from	their	weapons,	Humayun’s	musketeers	in	the	rocks	above	dropped
their	muskets	and	drew	their	swords	before	charging	and	sliding	their	way	down	through	the	scree
into	the	chaotic	battle.
Humayun,	still	eager	above	all	to	capture	his	brother,	broke	away	and	with	a	dozen	riders	made	for
the	 barricades.	 Before	 he	 had	 gone	 half	 a	 mile	 he	 was	 confronted	 by	 a	 band	 of	 about	 twenty	 of
Kamran’s	men	galloping	back	towards	him.	Urging	his	black	horse	on,	Humayun	gathered	speed.	So
too	did	those	around	him.	The	two	groups	met	head	on.	One	of	Kamran’s	men	cut	at	Humayun’s	head

with	his	sword	but	the	blow	glanced	off	his	helmet.	At	the	same	time,	Humayun’s	sword	sliced	into	his
opponent’s	upper	arm.	Not	expecting	an	attack,	very	few	of	Kamran’s	men	had	been	wearing	chain
mail	so	Humayun’s	sword	bit	deep,	splintering	bone	and	almost	severing	the	arm.
A	second	man	swung	at	Humayun	with	a	battle	flail.	One	of	the	spikes	on	the	ball	at	the	end	of	its
chain	nicked	Humayun’s	nose	as	it	whirled,	parting	the	air	in	front	of	his	face.	His	nose	felt	numb	and
instantly	blood	ran	into	his	mouth	and	down	the	back	of	his	throat.	However,	turning	his	horse	tightly,
he	 pursued	 his	 assailant	 who	 swung	 his	 flail	 once	 more,	 this	 time	 wildly,	 missing	 Humayun	 by	 a
distance.	As	he	passed,	Humayun	slashed	at	the	back	of	the	man’s	neck.	The	stroke	deflected	off	his
opponent’s	helmet,	losing	some	of	its	force,	but	still	cut	into	his	neck,	drawing	blood.	The	man	fell
forward,	losing	control	of	his	horse	which	reared	up,	throwing	him	heavily	to	the	ground	where	he
struggled	to	rise	but	soon	collapsed	and	lay	still.
‘Look	 out,	 Majesty,	 behind	 you!’	 Humayun	 turned	 only	 just	 in	 time	 as	 another	 of	 Kamran’s	 men
rode	into	the	attack	with	his	curved	scimitar	held	high.	This	time	Humayun’s	response	was	instant	and
instinctive	–	a	sword	cut	over	the	head	of	his	assailant’s	horse	and	into	his	groin.	He	fell	at	once.
As	he	coughed	and	spat	the	salty,	metallic-tasting	blood	from	his	mouth,	Humayun	saw	that	he	and
his	men	had	killed	eight	of	their	twenty	assailants	and	that	the	rest	had	lost	their	appetite	for	the	fight
and	were	fleeing.	Within	moments	Humayun	was	once	more	riding	hard	up	the	stony	track	towards
the	 barricades,	 only,	 almost	 immediately,	 to	 see	 Bairam	 Khan	 leading	 a	 detachment	 of	 around	 five
hundred	of	his	own	horsemen	towards	him,	his	scarlet	banner	flying.
Reining	in	his	snorting,	foam-flecked	horse,	Bairam	Khan	said,	face	creased	in	a	triumphant	smile,
‘Kamran’s	 men	 are	 fleeing	 in	 every	 direction.’	 Looking	 around	 him	 in	 the	 now	 gathering	 dusk,
Humayun	saw	that	victory	was	his	–	but	was	it	really	a	victory?	To	his	intense	disappointment	he	had
failed	 to	 capture	 his	 half-brother	 –	 something	 he	 must	 do	 before	 he	 could	 safely	 turn	 to	 his	 great
enterprise,	the	recapture	of	Hindustan.
‘Make	sure	we	pursue	and	capture	as	many	of	Kamran’s	men	as	we	can	before	night	falls	entirely.
I’ll	offer	a	bag	of	gold	coins	to	anyone	who	takes	my	traitorous	half-brother	alive	or	dead.’

Chapter	23
Doing	Good	to	the	Evil
Humayun	lay	back	against	a	red	and	gold	brocade	cushion	and	away	from	the	low	gilded	table	piled
with	silver	plates	from	which	he	and	Hamida	had	just	eaten	their	midday	meal.	Humayun	had	chosen
chicken	baked	slowly	with	spices	and	yoghurt	in	the	tandoor	–	the	clay	oven	that	was	essential	to	any
Moghul	kitchen	and	was	always	taken	with	them	on	campaign.	He	smiled	at	Hamida	who	after	taking
a	bite	from	a	sticky	orange	sweetmeat	was	daintily	rinsing	her	fingers	in	a	small,	engraved	copper
bowl	of	rosewater.	She	smiled	back.	As	he	watched	a	shaft	of	sunlight	fall	through	the	casement	on	to
the	small,	bubbling	marble	fountain	behind	her,	Humayun	felt	content.
He	smiled	again	at	Hamida	and	from	the	quiver	in	her	lips	and	the	twinkle	in	her	eyes	he	realized
that	 she	 knew	 he	 was	 contemplating	 love-making	 after	 the	 meal	 and	 she	 would	 welcome	 it.	 He	 was
about	 to	 stretch	 his	 arm	 out	 to	 her	 when	 her	 attendant	 Zainab	 entered.	 Even	 before	 she	 spoke,
Humayun	saw	from	the	anxiety	on	her	face	that	his	afternoon	of	warm,	languorous	love	would	have
to	be	postponed.
‘Majesty.	Ahmed	Khan	begs	your	urgent	presence	–	they	have	captured	your	half-brother	Kamran.’
As	Zainab	spoke	the	words,	Humayun	saw	Hamida’s	expression	suddenly	change	from	that	of	a	warm
lover	to	a	triumphant,	avenging	mother.	She	had	never	forgiven	–	never	mind	forgotten	–	Kamran’s
treatment	 of	 her	 only	 son	 and	 had	 often	 rebuked	 Humayun	 for	 the	 number	 of	 times	 he	 had	 spared
Kamran’s	 life.	 She	 had	 frequently	 quoted	 to	 him	 some	 lines	 from	 her	 favourite	 Persian	 poet:	 Bad
earth	does	not	produce	hyacinths,	so	don’t	waste	seeds	of	hope	in	it.	Doing	good	to	the	evil	is	as	bad
as	doing	evil	to	the	good.
Before	 Humayun	 could	 say	 anything,	 Hamida	 burst	 out,	 ‘Praise	 God	 for	 his	 capture.	 This	 time	 I
hope	there’ll	be	no	talk	of	mercy.	He’s	had	far	more	chances	than	he	deserves	and	each	time	spurned
the	opportunity	you	gave	him	to	reform.	His	resentment	of	you	runs	so	deep	within	him	he	will	never
relent.	Don’t	think	twice.	Have	him	executed	within	the	hour,	if	not	for	my	sake,	for	that	of	our	son
whose	life	he	held	so	cheap.’
Humayun	 said	 nothing	 as	 he	 rose	 to	 leave	 the	 room,	 pausing	 only	 to	 grab	 his	 father ’s	 sword
Alamgir.	Nevertheless,	he	felt	some	of	the	same	deep	anger	so	clear	in	Hamida’s	words	welling	up
within	him.	It	mingled	with	an	almost	ecstatic	relief	that	at	last	he	would	be	free	of	Kamran’s	threat	to
his	rear	while	he	pressed	on	with	his	plans	for	probing	raids	beyond	the	Indus	to	test	the	strength	of
Islam	Shah’s	grip	on	Hindustan.
Ahmed	 Khan	 was	 waiting	 in	 the	 sunlit	 courtyard	 as	 Humayun	 emerged	 through	 the	 silver-lined
doors	of	the	women’s	quarters.
‘Where	did	you	capture	him,	Ahmed	Khan,	and	how?’
‘Two	days	ago	we	seized	a	petty	tribal	chief	who	had	supported	Kamran	in	his	last	rebellion.	We
brought	him	to	the	citadel	and	confined	him	in	the	dungeons.	Early	this	morning	he	asked	for	me	and
in	a	bid	to	reduce	his	punishment	he	hinted	that	he	knew	where	Kamran	might	be.	I	told	him	I	 could
make	no	deals	without	reference	to	you,	Majesty,	but	he	should	tell	me	immediately	what	he	knew.	He

could	 be	 sure	 that	 if	 Kamran	 were	 found	 you	 would	 not	 be	 ungrateful.	 He	 said	 he	 believed	 that
Kamran	 was	 hiding	 in	 a	 poor	 quarter	 of	 Kabul	 itself	 –	 the	 area	 around	 the	 tanneries.	 He	 admitted
when	I	pressed	him	that	his	information	was	old	–	at	least	a	week	–	and	that	his	informant,	a	petty	thief
who	had	been	among	Kamran’s	camp	followers,	was	not	necessarily	reliable.	Nevertheless,	I	thought
it	 worthwhile	 to	 send	 a	 strong	 detachment	 of	 our	 men	 immediately	 down	 to	 the	 tanneries	 area	 to
cordon	it	off	and	make	a	house	to	house	search.
‘I’m	glad	I	did,	Majesty.	When	the	soldiers	came	to	the	house	of	a	tanner	whose	family	is	from	the
south,	 the	 tanner	 seemed	 panic-stricken	 and	 tried	 to	 prevent	 them	 entering,	 claiming	 that	 his	 wife’s
mother	was	lying	gravely	ill	with	the	spotted	fever.	My	men	pushed	him	aside	and	searched	the	house,
throwing	aside	piles	of	skins	and	even	probing	with	their	spears	the	deep	copper	vats	of	dye	and	urine
used	for	tanning.	They	found	nothing,	but	still	convinced	that	the	tanner	was	hiding	something	–	or
someone	–	they	entered	the	curtained-off	portion	of	the	top	floor	where	the	tanner	claimed	his	sick
mother-in-law	 was	 lying.	 Here	 they	 found	 a	 body	 hunched	 beneath	 some	 dirty	 blankets.	 Pulling	 the
blankets	off	they	saw	a	large	figure	with	big	feet	and	hands	–	too	big	for	a	woman,	they	thought	–
curled	up	like	a	baby.	The	so-called	“mother-in-law”	was	wearing	rough	women’s	garments	and	had
a	 thick	 black	 veil	 of	 the	 type	 worn	 by	 Arab	 women	 over	 her	 face.	 She	 was	 pleading	 piteously	 in	 a
high-pitched	voice	to	be	left	to	die	in	peace.	Nevertheless,	the	officer	leading	the	party	reached	out	to
lift	 up	 her	 veil.	 As	 he	 did	 so,	 the	 figure	 pulled	 a	 dagger	 from	 the	 voluminous	 folds	 of	 her	 grubby
brown	 robe	 and	 stabbed	 him	 in	 the	 forearm.	 Two	 of	 the	 officer ’s	 men	 quickly	 restrained	 her,	 and
without	her	veil	it	was	clear	she	was	no	woman	but	your	stubble-chinned	half-brother.
‘At	first	he	struggled	and	screamed	that	you	were	a	worthless	ruler	and	he	the	rightful	king;	that
our	men	were	lickspittles	of	a	wastrel	and	should	come	to	their	senses	and	let	him	go.	However,	after
a	little	he	grew	silent,	seemingly	resigned	to	whatever	fate	had	in	store	for	him.’
‘Where	is	my	half-brother	now?’
‘In	the	dungeons	below	the	citadel,	Majesty.’
In	 his	 mind’s	 eye,	 Humayun	 saw	 the	 three-year-old	 Akbar	 on	 the	 battlements	 of	 Kabul	 and	 again
felt	a	sudden	surge	of	anger	against	his	half-brother.	How	easily	Akbar	could	have	been	killed.	How
many	 others	 had	 died	 in	 Kamran’s	 rebellions?	 He	 drew	 his	 sword	 Alamgir	 from	 its	 jewelled
scabbard.
‘Ahmed	Khan,	take	me	to	Kamran.’
Swiftly,	Ahmed	Khan	led	the	way	across	the	courtyard,	through	a	low	door	with	guards	on	either
side,	and	down	a	series	of	steep	steps	into	the	damp	lower	reaches	of	the	citadel.	Humayun	struggled
to	 adjust	 his	 eyes	 to	 the	 darkness	 of	 the	 interior	 corridors	 in	 which	 only	 an	 occasional	 oil	 lamp
burned	in	an	alcove.	As	his	vision	improved	he	thought	he	saw	a	large	rat	run	close	along	the	wall.	At
least	he	could	stop	his	rat	of	a	brother	living	to	infect	others	with	the	disease	of	rebellion,	he	thought,
and	tightened	his	grip	on	his	sword	hilt.	By	now	they	were	approaching	the	door	of	Kamran’s	cell,
which	was	guarded	by	four	of	Ahmed	Khan’s	men.
‘Let	me	enter	alone,’	said	Humayun.	‘I	will	deal	with	this	obdurate	traitor.	I	alone	should	spill	my
family’s	blood.’
One	of	the	guards	pulled	back	the	heavy	iron	bolts	at	the	top	and	bottom	of	the	thick	wooden	door.
Humayun	 entered	 the	 small	 cell	 and	 there	 was	 Kamran,	 whom	 he	 had	 not	 seen	 for	 over	 five	 years,
slumped	on	the	straw-covered	floor,	his	back	against	the	damp	stone	wall.	He	was	still	dressed	in	the
brown	women’s	clothes	he’d	been	wearing	when	he	was	captured.	They	were	full	of	holes,	and	with
the	heavy	black	veil	thrown	back	over	his	head	he	looked	ridiculous	not	rebellious.
After	 a	 moment,	 Kamran	 got	 slowly	 to	 his	 feet.	 He	 avoided	 Humayun’s	 eye,	 and	 it	 was	 he	 who

broke	the	silence	first.	‘I’m	not	going	to	plead	with	you	for	my	life.	So	don’t	think	I’m	about	to	fall	at
your	feet	and	beg	for	mercy.	I	see	our	father ’s	sword	in	your	hand.	Use	it.	Kill	me.	If	I	were	in	your
position	I	wouldn’t	hesitate	.	.	.	There’s	only	one	thing	I	want	.	.	.	’	and	here	he	raised	his	green	eyes
for	the	first	time	and	looked	deep	into	Humayun’s.	‘Bury	me	next	to	our	father.’
Humayun	stared	unflinchingly	back.	‘Why	should	I	when	you	have	dishonoured	his	memory?	Why
should	I	when	you	have	broken	every	promise	you	ever	made	to	me,	thrown	back	my	offers	of	peace
and	reconciliation,	and	worst	of	all	exposed	my	son	to	danger?’
‘To	prove	you’re	better	than	me,	just	as	you	loved	to	do	when	we	were	children.	But	what	do	I	care
about	where	my	body	lies.	Get	it	over	with.	Prove	you’re	not	the	weakling	everyone,	including	me,
knows	 you	 are.’	 Kamran	 pushed	 his	 face	 into	 Humayun’s	 and	 spat	 a	 great	 gob	 of	 rancid-smelling
spittle	into	his	eye.
But	 Humayun	 did	 not	 react.	 Suddenly	 the	 real	 wisdom	 behind	 Babur ’s	 dying	 words,	 Do	 nothing
against	 your	 brothers,	 however	 much	 you	 think	 they	 may	 deserve	 it,	 had	 hit	 him	 with	 a	 new	 clarity.
Babur	 had	 been	 protecting	 Humayun	 as	 much	 as	 his	 brothers.	 Could	 he	 live	 with	 himself	 if	 he
murdered	his	own	brother	in	anger?	By	inciting	him	to	kill	him	now	in	this	squalid	cell,	Kamran	–
who	knew	him	so	well	–	was	setting	one	last	trap	for	him,	daring	him	to	set	honour	aside	and	descend
to	his	level,	and	in	his	anger	to	prove	that	all	his	previous	gestures	of	reconciliation	had	been	acts	of
weakness,	not	of	mercy.
Humayun	lowered	his	sword	and	wiped	away	the	spittle.	‘I	am	pleased	you	recognise	you	deserve
death	but	I’ll	consult	with	my	counsellors	as	to	your	fate.	If	you	die	it	will	be	an	act	of	cool	justice	and
not	hot	vengeance.’	As	he	turned	to	leave,	Humayun	thought	he	saw	a	brief	half-smile	cross	Kamran’s
lips.	Was	he	laughing	at	him	for	what	he	saw	as	his	weakness	or,	after	all,	was	he	simply	relieved	that
for	the	moment	he	would	live?
When	he	turned	back	to	look	at	Kamran	again,	his	half-brother ’s	eyes	were	downcast	once	more,
his	face	expressionless.

Humayun	 scrutinised	 his	 counsellors,	 gathered	 in	 his	 sunlit	 audience	 chamber.	 His	 own	 mood	 was
dark.	He	needed	to	decide	the	fate	of	Kamran.To	delay	would	be	to	appear	weak.	His	counsellors	too
seemed	grave	as	he	began.
‘It	is	for	me	to	take	the	decision	whether	my	half-brother	Kamran	should	live	or	die	but	I	wish	to
seek	your	views.	Undoubtedly	he	has	been	responsible	for	the	death	of	many	men	in	the	rebellions	he
has	 raised	 against	 me.	 His	 opposition	 has	 weakened	 my	 power,	 delayed	 my	 plans	 to	 reconquer
Hindustan,	as	well	as	exposed	my	son	Akbar	to	danger.	Yet	he	is	my	half-brother,	my	father ’s	son	and
of	the	blood	of	Timur.	If	I	am	to	spill	that	blood	I	must	do	so	only	if	I	am	convinced	that	there	is	no
other	course	I	can	take	and	that	his	death	is	for	the	sake	of	justice	and	the	benefit	of	my	realm	and	its
people.	Give	me	your	views.’
‘Majesty,’	 Bairam	 Khan	 stepped	 forward,	 his	 voice	 firm	 and	 clear,	 ‘I	 think	 I	 speak	 for	 all	 of	 us
here.	There	can	be	no	doubt.Your	half-brother	should	die	for	the	sake	of	you,	your	son,	your	dynasty
and	us	all.	Kamran	is	not	your	brother,	he	is	your	enemy.	Put	aside	any	brotherly	feelings	you	have
for	 him.	 They	 have	 no	 place	 in	 a	 ruler ’s	 decisions.	 If	 you	 wish	 to	 remain	 king	 and	 to	 achieve	 the
ambition	we	all	share	of	regaining	the	throne	of	Hindustan	for	yourself	and	your	son	there	is	only

one	course	to	take.	Execute	him.	Am	I	not	right,	my	fellow	commanders?’
Without	hesitation	and	as	with	one	voice	they	answered,	‘Yes!’
‘Does	none	of	you	advocate	any	other	solution?’	Humayun	asked.
‘No,	Majesty.’
‘Thank	 you.	 I	 will	 ponder	 your	 advice.’	 Humayun	 walked	 straight	 from	 the	 room,	 his	 brow
furrowed.	The	decision	was	not	as	easy	as	his	counsellors	suggested.	They	did	not	share	Kamran’s
blood	 as	 he	 did.	 Without	 thinking	 consciously	 of	 what	 he	 was	 doing,	 Humayun	 headed	 for	 the
women’s	 apartments	 and	 when	 he	 got	 there	 went	 straight	 to	 Gulbadan’s	 room.	 His	 half-sister	 was
sitting	 on	 a	 low	 gilt	 chair	 wearing	 a	 loose	 purple	 silk	 robe	 as	 her	 attendant	 pulled	 an	 ivory	 comb
through	her	dark	hair.	As	soon	as	she	saw	the	expression	on	Humayun’s	face,	Gulbadan	dismissed	the
woman.	‘What	is	the	matter?’
‘You	know	they	have	captured	Kamran	once	more	and	he	is	imprisoned	in	the	dungeons?’
‘Of	course.’
‘I	 am	 desperately	 searching	 my	 conscience	 as	 to	 what	 his	 fate	 must	 be.	 I	 realise	 that	 by	 all	 the
normal	conventions	he	deserves	death	for	his	many	misdeeds	and	my	advisers	tell	me	unanimously
that	this	time	he	must	die.	Often,	when	I’ve	anticipated	the	moment	he’d	be	in	my	power	again,	anger
at	 him	 for	 his	 ill-treatment	 of	 Akbar	 alone	 has	 made	 me	 want	 to	 kill	 him	 myself,	 and	 Hamida	 –	 as
Akbar ’s	mother	–	urges	this	upon	me.	However,	when	I	become	calmer	I	know	I	must	not	act	in	anger
but	 for	 what	 is	 best	 for	 our	 empire.	 I	 remember	 our	 father ’s	 injunction	 to	 do	 nothing	 against	 my
brothers	and	I	hesitate.’
‘I	understand	your	dilemma,’	Gulbadan	said,	taking	Humayun’s	hand.	‘You	have	always	been	a	man
of	your	word.	Remember	how	you	honoured	your	promise	to	Nizam	the	water-seller	that	he	could	sit
on	 your	 throne	 for	 an	 hour	 or	 two,	 despite	 the	 mutterings	 of	 your	 courtiers?	 Because	 you	 always
keep	your	word,	you	sometimes	fail	to	realise	that	others	like	Sher	Shah	who	deceived	you	before	the
battle	 of	 Chausa	 –	 or	 indeed	 our	 half-brothers	 –	 will	 not.You	 have	 given	 Kamran	 so	 many	 chances
and	he	has	exploited	your	mercy	so	often	that	even	I	believe	that	his	persistent	wickedness	negates	any
promise	you	ever	made	to	our	father	.	.	.	’	She	paused.	‘If	I	am	honest	I	think	he	should	die.	It	would	be
best	for	the	dynasty	that	our	father	fought	so	hard	to	establish.	With	Kamran	gone	you	will	be	free	to
concentrate	on	the	recapture	of	Hindustan.’
Humayun	said	nothing	for	a	long	time.	At	last	he	spoke	very	deliberately.	‘I	know	that	in	logic	you
are	right.	I	know	also	our	father	always	said	I	loved	solitude	too	much	.	.	.	but	I	must	go	to	consider
alone	for	a	time	before	taking	my	final	decision.’
‘Why	not	take	our	father ’s	memoirs	with	you	to	see	if	they	offer	you	any	solace	or	guidance?	After
all,	he	wrote	them,	as	he	put	it,	“to	give	guidance	for	living	and	ruling”.’
A	few	minutes	later,	Humayun	climbed	the	stone	stairs	to	the	top	of	the	highest	watchtower	on	the
walls	of	the	citadel	in	Kabul.	In	his	hand	were	his	father ’s	memoirs	which,	in	their	ivory	binding,	he
had	 preserved	 so	 carefully	 throughout	 all	 his	 vicissitudes.	 He	 had	 left	 Jauhar	 at	 the	 entrance	 to	 the
watchtower	 with	 strict	 orders	 that	 no	 one	 should	 be	 allowed	 to	 enter.	 As	 he	 reached	 the	 top	 of	 the
stairs	and	emerged	on	to	the	flat	roof,	Humayun	felt	that	the	day’s	heat	was	dying.	It	would	be	dark	in
an	hour.	Perhaps	he	should	wait	until	the	stars	came	out	to	see	what	guidance	they	might	offer	him,
but	 then	 he	 dismissed	 the	 idea.	 He	 had	 learned	 from	 the	 many	 trials	 and	 disappointments	 he	 had
endured	during	his	life	that	he	could	not	abdicate	responsibility	for	his	decisions	to	the	stars	any	more
than	he	could	to	his	advisers,	his	wife	or	his	blood	relations.
Babur	 had	 told	 him	 that	 he	 had	 discovered	 early	 that	 a	 ruler	 had	 to	 rule.	 This	 gave	 the	 ruler	 an
unparalleled	 freedom	 and	 opportunity	 to	 fulfil	 his	 ambitions,	 but	 it	 also	 made	 his	 role	 an	 intensely

lonely	one.	He	had	not	only	to	take	the	decisions	but	to	live	with	the	consequences	both	in	this	life	and
when	called	to	judgement	in	the	life	beyond.
As	the	light	began	to	fade,	Humayun	opened	his	father ’s	memoirs	at	random.	His	eyes	first	fell	on	a
paragraph	which	described	how,	during	one	of	his	campaigns,	Timur	had	in	a	rare	moment	of	mercy
followed	an	older	tradition	among	the	dwellers	on	the	steppes	and	had	a	powerful	member	of	his	own
family	who	had	been	caught	plotting	an	uprising	blinded	rather	than	killed	to	avoid	creating	a	blood
feud.	Babur	had	commended	this	as	a	way	of	disarming	a	rebel	and	noted	that	such	punishments	still
continued	among	many	of	the	tribes	and	were	considered	just	and	proper.
Immediately,	Humayun	knew	that	this	must	be	Kamran’s	fate.	His	threat	would	be	extinguished	with
his	 sight.	 No	 rebellious	 chief	 could	 ever	 again	 consider	 Kamran	 a	 rival	 to	 Humayun.Yet	 his	 halfbrother	would	have	time	to	consider	and	perhaps	to	repent	before	he	was	called	to	eternal	judgement.
Such	a	punishment	would	be	harsh,	but	Humayun	knew	that	in	inflicting	it	he	would	be	respecting	his
instinct	 to	 show	 some	 mercy	 and	 also	 be	 taking	 some	 account	 of	 his	 father ’s	 injunction	 not	 to	 be
provoked	into	unthinking	violence	against	his	half-brothers.
Closing	the	ivory	covers	of	Babur ’s	memoirs,	Humayun	descended	the	stairs.	‘Call	my	advisers	to
me	straightaway,’	he	told	Jauhar.	Within	five	minutes	they	were	standing	around	him.	‘I	have	decided
that	my	half-brother	Kamran	must	be	blinded,	both	as	a	punishment	for	his	consistent	misdeeds	and	to
obviate	any	threat	he	might	continue	to	pose	to	my	rule	here	and	to	our	recovery	of	our	possessions
in	Hindustan.	The	punishment	will	be	carried	out	tonight	an	hour	after	sunset.	I	ask	you,	Zahid	Beg,	to
take	charge.	I	wish	the	method	to	be	the	quickest	known	to	the	hakims	and	my	half-brother	to	be	given
no	warning	so	that	he	does	not	have	time	to	fear	what	is	to	come.	I	do	not	wish	to	see	his	agony	and
suffering.	Jauhar,	you	will	be	my	witness.	However,	Kamran	needs	to	know	that	the	punishment	has
been	inflicted	on	my	specific	orders	and	I	alone	take	responsibility	for	it.	Therefore,	you	will	bring
my	half-brother	to	me	a	little	before	the	time	of	evening	prayer	tomorrow.’

‘Majesty,’	reported	Jauhar	an	hour	and	a	half	later,	‘it	is	done.	The	whole	thing	was	over	within	five
minutes	or	less	of	Zahid	Beg’s	six	men	entering	the	cell.	Four	of	them	each	seized	one	of	your	halfbrother ’s	limbs	and	held	him	to	the	ground.	As	he	struggled	and	kicked,	the	fifth	–	a	bear	of	a	man	–
took	 hold	 of	 Kamran’s	 head	 in	 his	 great	 hands	 and	 held	 it	 still.	 The	 sixth	 took	 needles	 he	 had
previously	 heated	 red	 hot	 in	 the	 flame	 and	 quickly	 pierced	 each	 of	 your	 brother ’s	 eyeballs	 in	 turn
several	times.	As	Kamran	screamed	like	a	wild	beast	in	his	agony,	the	man	rubbed	lemon	juice	and
salt	into	his	eyeballs	to	ensure	all	vision	was	lost.	Then	he	bound	your	half-brother ’s	eyes	with	clean,
soft	cotton	bandages	and	told	him	that	he	had	no	more	to	endure.	Then	they	left	him	to	contemplate
both	his	punishment	and	that	he	was	to	live	–	albeit	an	impaired	life	.	.	.	’

The	next	evening,	just	before	prayers,	Kamran	was	led	into	Humayun’s	presence.	His	eyes	were	no

longer	bandaged	and	on	Humayun’s	orders	he	had	been	washed	and	clothed	in	garments	befitting	a
Moghul	prince	of	the	blood.	Humayun	dismissed	the	guards	and	spoke	softly	to	Kamran.
‘It	 is	 I,	 Humayun,	 your	 half-brother.	 I	 give	 you	 my	 word	 we	 are	 alone.’	 As	 Kamran	 turned	 his
sightless	eyes	towards	him	he	continued,	‘I	want	you	to	know	that	I	and	I	alone	am	responsible	for
your	blinding.	No	blame	should	attach	to	those	who	committed	the	deed.	I	acted	as	I	did	because	I	had
lost	faith	that	any	clemency	I	showed	would	cause	you	to	repent	and	I	needed	to	protect	my	throne	and
the	 future	 of	 Akbar	 and	 of	 our	 dynasty.’	 Humayun	 stopped	 and	 waited,	 half	 expecting	 a	 stream	 of
invective	from	Kamran	or	even	an	attempt,	despite	his	blindness,	to	attack	him.
But	after	a	short	silence	Kamran	spoke	in	a	subdued	voice.	‘You	have	left	me	with	my	life	but	at	the
same	time	taken	everything	I	cared	about	from	me	–	my	plans,	my	ambitions.	I	congratulate	you.	You
can	appear	the	great	and	merciful	padishah	while	knowing	you	have	destroyed	me	more	completely
than	if	you’d	struck	off	my	head	.	.	.	’
Humayun	 said	 nothing	 and	 after	 a	 moment	 Kamran	 continued.	 ‘I	 don’t	 blame	 you.	 I	 have	 often
scorned	your	mercy	and	know	I	deserved	punishment.	As	I	lay	awake	last	night,	praying	for	the	pain
in	 these	 now	 useless	 eyes	 to	 ease	 and	 reflecting	 that	 my	 life	 as	 I	 have	 always	 known	 it	 was	 over,
another	thought	came	into	my	mind.	It	was	strange,	but	I	felt	almost	a	sense	of	relief	.	.	.	the	feeling
that	finally,	after	all	these	years,	I	could	shake	off	the	burden	of	earthly	ambitions.	I	have	one	thing
and	one	thing	only	to	ask	of	you	and	I	ask	it	sincerely.’
‘What	is	that?’
‘I	do	not	wish	to	remain	here,	an	object	of	contempt	or	of	pity	or	even	of	any	generosity	you	may
wish	to	extend	to	me.	Let	me,	like	Askari,	make	the	haj	–	the	pilgrimage	to	Mecca.	It	may	even	afford
me	some	spiritual	consolation.’
‘Go,’	said	Humayun,	‘go	with	my	blessing.’	As	he	spoke	he	felt	tears	wet	his	cheeks.	He	was,	he
realised,	crying	partly	from	sadness	at	the	loss	of	the	innocent	times	he	and	his	half-brother	had	so
briefly	enjoyed,	partly	for	the	years	they	had	wasted	in	conflict	when	together	they	could	have	been
recovering	their	father ’s	empire,	and	partly	for	the	pain	he	had	inflicted	on	Kamran	the	night	before.
However,	 above	 all,	 his	 tears	 reflected	 a	 profound	 and	 transcending	 relief.	 He	 was	 now	 free	 to
concentrate	on	achieving	his	ambition	once	more	to	be	Padishah	of	Hindustan	and	even	to	enlarge	his
dominions	and	to	build	the	great	empire	of	which	Babur	had	dreamed.

Chapter	24
Warm	Bread
Majesty,	Islam	Shah	is	dead.	The	throne	of	Hindustan	is	vacant.
While	the	masseur	kneaded	the	muscles	of	his	upper	back	and	rubbed	sweet-smelling	coconut	oil
into	them,	Humayun	smiled	as	he	remembered	the	first	time	–	six	weeks	ago	–	that	he	had	heard	these
words	 from	 an	 excited	 Ahmed	 Khan.	 Over	 the	 subsequent	 days	 the	 rumours	 had	 grown	 stronger,
brought	by	travellers	making	the	journey	up	through	the	Khyber	Pass	from	Hindustan.	Some	had	said
that	Islam	Shah	had	died	unexpectedly	several	months	ago	and	that	his	supporters	had	been	successful
for	a	time	in	concealing	the	fact	while	they	tried	to	agree	on	a	successor.	With	each	passing	day	and
with	 each	 piece	 of	 news,	 renewed	 energy	 had	 pulsed	 through	 Humayun.	 He	 could	 feel	 a	 great
opportunity	to	recover	his	throne	opening	up.	Free	of	anxiety	about	threats	to	Kabul	from	his	halfbrothers	if	he	left	the	city,	he	would	grasp	it	and	put	an	end	to	his	long	years	of	disappointment	and
exile.
Immediately,	he	had	taken	measures	to	prepare	his	army	for	action.At	this	very	minute	outside	the
walls	of	the	citadel,	his	officers	were	drilling	his	musketeers	to	increase	the	speed	and	discipline	with
which	they	primed,	loaded	and	fired	their	weapons.	His	recruiting	agents	were	busy	in	the	remotest
valleys	 of	 his	 kingdom	 and	 beyond	 gathering	 additional	 recruits.	 The	 masseur	 now	 pummelling
Humayun’s	thighs	and	buttocks	was	also	part	of	Humayun’s	mental	and	physical	preparation.	To	help
plan	 his	 campaign	 he	 had	 begun	 to	 reread	 his	 father ’s	 memoirs	 of	 his	 attack	 on	 Hindustan	 and	 to
compare	them	with	his	own	recollections	of	the	invasion.
He	had	tried	in	conversation	with	his	commanders,	particularly	Ahmed	Khan,	to	understand	where
he	had	made	mistakes	in	his	own	campaigns	against	Sher	Shah	and	why	he	had	succeeded	elsewhere
such	as	in	Gujarat.	Sitting	alone	in	his	apartments	late	one	evening	he	had	summed	it	up	to	himself.
‘Prepare	well,	think	and	act	fast	and	decisively.	Make	your	opponent	respond	to	you	and	not	the	other
way	round.’
Over	the	years	he	had	allowed	himself	to	indulge	once	more	in	the	wines	of	Ghazni	and,	since	he
had	regained	Kabul,	just	occasionally	in	the	care-numbing	relief	of	the	opium	pipe.	Now,	to	sharpen
his	mind	and	toughen	his	body	for	the	rigours	of	warfare,	he	was,	after	a	great	internal	struggle	and
an	enormous	effort	of	will,	abstaining	entirely	from	both	alcohol	and	opium.	He	had	also	taken	up
wrestling	again	and	the	masseur	was	readying	him	for	his	daily	training	contest.	With	a	quick	gesture
to	the	man	to	cease	his	work,	Humayun	rolled	over	on	to	his	back	and	stood	up.	He	pulled	on	a	pair	of
long	 cotton	 trousers,	 his	 only	 clothing	 for	 the	 fight,	 and	 made	 his	 way	 through	 some	 fine	 yellow
muslin	curtains	into	the	next	room.	Here	his	opponent,	a	tall,	heavily	muscled	Badakhshani,	awaited
him,	similarly	clothed	and	oiled.
‘Don’t	hold	back,	Bayzid	Khan.’	Humayun	smiled.	‘You	have	taught	me	well.	There’s	a	bag	of	coin
in	it	for	you	if	you	can	overcome	me	within	ten	minutes.	Now	let’s	get	on	with	it.’
The	 two	 men	 circled	 each	 other,	 waiting	 to	 see	 who	 made	 the	 first	 move.	 It	 was	 Humayun	 who
darted	 forward	 to	 seize	 Bayzid	 Khan’s	 arm	 and	 try	 to	 throw	 him.	 However,	 Bayzid	 Khan	 twisted

himself	 from	 Humayun’s	 grip	 and	 in	 turn	 grabbed	 Humayun’s	 shoulders	 to	 pull	 him	 off	 balance.
Humayun	resisted	and	the	two	men	struggled,	arms	on	each	other ’s	shoulders,	testing	their	strength.
Then	 Bayzid	 Khan	 tripped	 Humayun	 with	 a	 swift	 kick	 of	 his	 foot	 to	 the	 back	 of	 Humayun’s	 knee.
Humayun	fell	and	Bayzid	Khan	launched	himself	to	pinion	him	against	the	mat	on	the	floor	and	end
the	contest.
But	Humayun	was	too	quick	and	rolled	away.	As	Bayzid	Khan	landed	on	the	mat,	Humayun	leaped
on	him	and	putting	his	knee	in	his	back	pulled	both	his	arms	out	behind	him.	Hard	as	Bayzid	Khan
struggled	he	could	not	free	himself.	‘Enough,	Majesty.	You	have	got	the	better	of	me	for	the	second
time.’
‘The	first,	I	think.	I	strongly	suspected	that	previously	you	let	me	win,	but	not	on	this	occasion.’
‘Perhaps,	Majesty.’
Humayun	returned	to	his	robing	room	and	washed	himself	clean	of	the	mixture	of	sweat	and	oil
coating	 his	 body	 in	 the	 large	 copper	 bath	 of	 warm,	 camphor-scented	 water	 that	 his	 servants	 had
prepared	during	the	contest.	As	he	dried	himself	with	a	rough	cotton	towel	and	dusted	himself	with
sandalwood-scented	 chalk	 powder,	 he	 looked	 at	 his	 naked	 body	 in	 a	 nearby	 burnished	 mirror.	 His
muscles	were	more	toned	and	prominent	than	a	month	ago.	His	looks	belied	his	forty-six	years,	he
thought,	and	smiled	with	satisfaction.	The	exercise	seemed	to	be	helping	him	focus	his	mind	and	think
more	clearly.	Certainly	too	he	was	making	love	more	frequently.
With	the	help	of	his	attendants,	Humayun	quickly	dressed,	ready	to	meet	his	counsellors.	Minutes
later,	wearing	a	gold-belted	navy	tunic	and	a	cream	turban	with	a	long	peacock’s	feather	at	its	peak,	he
entered	the	council	chamber.
‘What	 is	 the	 latest	 news	 from	 Hindustan,	 Ahmed	 Khan?	 Didn’t	 another	 caravan	 come	 in	 this
morning?’
‘Yes,	 Majesty.	 It	 brought	 confirmation	 of	 what	 is	 for	 us	 good	 news.	 There	 can	 be	 no	 doubt	 that
Islam	Shah	is	dead.	What	is	more,	a	rich	merchant	in	today’s	caravan	says	that	fighting	has	broken	out
among	 three	 contenders	 for	 the	 throne	 in	 and	 around	 Delhi.With	 no	 proper	 authority	 dacoits	 have
been	robbing	with	impunity,	invading	the	homes	of	the	wealthy	by	night,	stealing,	raping	and	killing.
The	 merchant	 concealed	 some	 of	 his	 treasure	 and	 packed	 the	 rest	 and	 brought	 his	 family	 on	 the
arduous	 journey	 north	 to	 your	 realm	 to	 be	 safe	 until	 he	 sees	 what	 happens	 in	 Hindustan.	 Other
members	 of	 the	 caravan	 substantiated	 his	 news	 with	 many	 circumstantial	 details	 of	 the	 chaos.	 One
reported	that	when	robbers	could	not	remove	valuable	rings	from	the	arthritic	fingers	of	a	rich	old
woman,	they	simply	hacked	off	her	fingers	and	left	her	to	bleed	to	death.’
‘The	fighting	and	lawlessness	will	give	us	the	opportunity	we	have	looked	for	to	regain	the	throne
and	to	bring	back	justice	and	order	to	the	citizens	of	our	rightful	kingdom.	What	do	we	know	about
these	three	other	contenders?’
‘One	is	Adil	Shah,	the	brother	of	Islam	Shah’s	favourite	wife	–	the	mother	of	his	only	son,	a	boy	of
five	years	of	age.	Adil	Shah	is	said	to	have	been	so	drunk	with	ambition	that	oblivious	of	the	ties	of
blood	he	entered	the	haram	and	cut	the	child’s	throat	in	front	of	his	mother	with	as	little	concern	as	a
butcher	slaughtering	a	beast	for	the	table.	Then	he	had	himself	proclaimed	emperor.’
Humayun	blanched.	Not	even	Kamran	had	stooped	so	low.	‘And	the	other	two?’
‘The	 most	 powerful	 is	 a	 cousin	 of	 Islam	 Shah	 who	 has	 had	 himself	 proclaimed	 emperor	 as
Sekunder	Shar.	He’s	already	defeated	Adil	Shah	once	but	failed	to	follow	up	his	victory	because	of	the
activities	 of	 the	 third	 pretender,	 Tartar	 Khan,	 the	 head	 of	 the	 old	 Lodi	 clan	 we	 supplanted	 and	 who
fought	against	us	with	the	Sultan	of	Gujarat.’
‘We	 need	 to	 obtain	 as	 much	 information	 as	 we	 can	 about	 each	 of	 them	 –	 who	 their	 friends	 and

enemies	are,	their	personal	strengths	and	vices,	how	many	men,	how	much	money	they	have.’
‘We	 will	 question	 the	 recently	 arrived	 travellers	 further.	 And	 of	 course	 send	 out	 more	 spies	 and
scouts.’
‘We	will	resume	our	discussion	tomorrow	to	plan	our	campaign	in	detail.	Now	is	the	time	for	our
evening	meal.’	Humayun	turned	to	leave	the	audience	chamber.	However,	as	he	did	so,	Ahmed	Khan
approached	him	and	handed	him	a	small	square	of	paper.
‘One	 of	 the	 travellers	 brought	 this	 sealed	 message	 which	 he	 told	 our	 guards	 was	 for	 your	 eyes
only.	He	said	that	a	member	of	his	family	–	a	sailor	who	had	just	returned	from	Arabia	and	heard	that
he	was	travelling	to	Kabul	–	had	asked	him	to	bring	it	to	you.	It	is	probably	nothing,	Majesty,	but	I
thought	I	should	leave	it	to	you	to	open.’
‘Thank	you,	Ahmed	Khan.	I	will	read	it	shortly.’
A	quarter	of	an	hour	later,	Humayun	entered	the	women’s	quarters	and	made	his	way	to	Hamida’s
apartments.	Looking	up,	she	said,	‘I	hear	there	is	good	news	from	Hindustan	.	.	.	’
Humayun	smiled,	but	the	smile	and	his	eyes	were	clouded	by	a	look	of	melancholy.‘The	news	from
Hindustan	is	indeed	good,	but	I’ve	received	other,	sadder	news	today.	It’s	about	Askari.	As	you	know,
I’ve	long	feared	that	some	accident	had	befallen	him	since	I’d	had	no	news	of	him	after	the	message
eighteen	months	ago	that	he	had	taken	ship	from	Cambay	for	the	holy	lands	around	Mecca.Today	I
received	confirmation	of	his	fate	.	.	.	’
Humayun	 pulled	 from	 his	 pocket	 the	 paper	 which	 Ahmed	 Khan	 had	 handed	 him.	 It	 had	 many
creases	and	folds.	‘It	is	from	Mohamed	Azruddin	–	the	commander	of	the	escort	I	provided	for	my
brother.	 It	 tells	 briefly	 how	 the	 voyage	 from	 Cambay	 was	 going	 well	 with	 favourable	 winds	 when
about	 twenty	 miles	 from	 the	 port	 of	 Salala	 on	 the	 Arab	 coast	 a	 fleet	 of	 three	 fast	 pirate	 vessels
overhauled	their	ship.	Askari	led	the	fight	against	the	pirates	as	they	boarded	but	was	overwhelmed
and	killed,	sword	in	hand.	Many	others	died	with	him.	Mohamed	Azruddin	was	badly	wounded	and
captured	 with	 the	 remainder	 of	 the	 escort	 and	 the	 coin	 they	 were	 carrying.	 On	 his	 recovery	 he	 was
sold	 in	 the	 great	 slave	 market	 of	 Muscat	 to	 work	 in	 the	 quarries	 outside	 the	 town.	 He	 escaped	 his
captors	six	months	ago	and	his	first	action	was	to	send	this	message	to	me	in	advance	of	his	return.’
‘May	God	forgive	Askari	for	his	misdeeds	and	may	his	soul	rest	in	Paradise,’	said	Hamida.	After	a
few	moments	she	continued,	‘Nevertheless,	this	definite	news	of	his	death	frees	you	from	any	fear	that
he	might	have	disappeared	on	purpose	to	plot	in	exile	against	you.’
‘True,	but	he	was	never	so	committed	an	adversary	as	Kamran	and	often,	I	think,	acted	only	from
loyalty	 to	 his	 brother	 and	 mother.	 I	 believed	 him	 when,	 before	 he	 left	 on	 the	 haj,	 he	 said	 he’d
renounced	all	thoughts	of	rebellion.	His	death	makes	me	more	conscious	that	I	am	the	only	one	left	to
fulfil	the	destiny	my	father	saw	for	his	family.’
‘For	a	long	time	you	have	been	the	only	one	of	his	sons	to	be	true	to	his	memory.’
‘But	I	have	lost	much	of	his	empire	and	failed	to	recover	it,	never	mind	to	expand	his	dominions.	I
have	let	myself	and	you,	as	well	as	my	father,	down.	My	intentions	have	been	good	but	I’ve	not	been
single-minded	enough	to	carry	them	through.’
‘That	is	changing.	Since	Askari’s	departure	for	the	haj	and	that	of	Kamran	too,	I	have	seen	a	real
determination	within	you.	You	no	longer	allow	your	mind	to	be	distracted	by	pleasure	or	idle	musing.
You’ve	always	wanted	to	recover	what	is	yours,	but	now	you	give	time	and	concentration	to	achieving
it.’
‘I	hope	so.	I’ve	used	bitter	memories	of	how	I	lost	my	throne,	of	your	face	in	our	bleakest	moment
when	Akbar	was	taken	from	us,	of	how	we	passed,	frozen	and	half-starving,	into	Persia	as	suppliants
to	the	shah,	to	act	as	goads	to	focus	all	my	energies	on	recovering	Hindustan.’

‘You	are	succeeding.	I	know	you	don’t	think	just	one	step	ahead	but	about	how	to	plan	the	whole
journey.’
‘I	pray	that	it	will	take	me	back	to	my	throne.’
‘Make	sure	it	does,	for	our	son’s	sake.’
Humayun	had	never	seen	Hamida	look	so	determined.	He	would	not	fail	her.

In	November	1554,	Humayun	stood	straight-backed,	a	fur-lined	robe	pulled	tight	around	him	against
the	 autumn	 cold,	 on	 the	 walls	 of	 Kabul	 with	 the	 twelve-year-old	 Akbar	 at	 his	 side	 as	 his	 newly
recruited	armies	marched	before	him.
‘Our	 emissaries	 have	 done	 well.They	 have	 brought	 in	 men	 from	 all	 over	 our	 own	 lands.	 Those
pale-skinned	 men	 over	 there	 are	 from	 Ghazni.	 The	 ones	 with	 the	 dark	 turbans	 and	 face	 cloths	 are
from	the	mountains	north	of	Kandahar.	Our	vassals	in	Badakhshan	and	the	lands	of	the	Tajiks	have
sent	soldiers.They	are	always	amongst	the	bravest	and	best	fighters,	and	well	equipped	too.	Look	how
fine	their	horses	are.’
‘But	who	are	those	men	over	there	under	the	yellow	flag,	Father?’
‘They	are	from	Ferghana	–	the	land	of	your	grandfather ’s	birth.	Hearing	rumours	of	the	death	of
Islam	Shah	they	had	started	unbidden	on	the	road	to	Kabul	to	offer	their	services	to	me,	knowing	I
would	be	sure	to	attack	Hindustan	.	.	.	’	Here	Humayun	stopped	for	a	moment,	his	voice	choking	with
emotion,	 and	 then	 continued,	 ‘I	 will	 lead	 them	 to	 victory	 just	 as	 your	 grandfather	 did.	 But	 see	 that
group	 of	 mounted	 archers?	 They	 are	 from	 around	 Samarkand	 and	 Bokhara	 and	 have	 fashioned
themselves	the	flag	of	our	great	ancestor	Timur	–	see	it	fluttering	now	with	its	orange	tiger	.	.	.	’
‘How	many	men	do	we	have?’
‘Twelve	thousand.’
‘That’s	less	than	when	my	grandfather	invaded	Hindustan.’
‘True,	 but	 we’ve	 more	 cannon,	 more	 muskets	 and	 additional	 recruits	 are	 joining	 every	 day.	 We
have	messages	that	many	of	Islam	Shah’s	vassals	will	defect	to	us	once	we	reach	their	territories	in
Hindustan.’
‘How	can	you	be	sure?’
Humayun	 smiled	 wryly.	 ‘Just	 as	 when	 their	 fathers	 deserted	 me	 so	 many	 years	 ago,	 they	 believe
they	know	who	the	victor	will	be.’
‘So	their	belief	in	our	success	will	ensure	it	happens?’
‘Yes	–	to	have	the	confidence	of	those	around	you	in	your	success	takes	you	a	great	way	to	victory.
Once	it	abates	it	is	difficult	to	restore.	That	is	one	lesson	I	have	learned.	This	time	we	must	ensure	it
does	not.	Each	victory	we	win	will	add	to	the	tide	of	confidence	washing	away	any	remaining	strength
our	opponents	have.’
‘I	understand,	Father.’
Looking	 at	 his	 son,	 Humayun	 realised	 that	 Akbar	 probably	 did.	 He	 had	 changed	 a	 lot	 in	 the	 past
year.	He	was	mature	for	his	age,	not	only	in	his	muscular	physique	and	stature	but	also	in	his	power
of	analysis	and	in	a	growing	astuteness	in	his	judgement	of	others.	Humayun	recalled	his	discussion
with	Hamida	the	previous	night	when	he	had	told	her	that	he	intended	to	take	Akbar	with	him	when	he
set	 out	 on	 his	 invasion	 of	 Hindustan	 in	 a	 few	 days.	 He	 had	 reminded	 her	 that	 Babur	 had	 only	 been

Akbar ’s	age	when	he	became	king.	To	take	Akbar	with	him	would	inspire	confidence	in	the	future	of
the	dynasty,	he	had	told	her.	It	would	show	that,	should	he	himself	fall,	unlike	Islam	Shah	he	would
have	a	worthy	successor.
Humayun	had	expected	Hamida	to	resist,	mindful	of	the	danger	to	which	Akbar	would	be	exposed,
but	although	tears	had	wetted	her	cheeks	at	first,	she	had	choked	them	back.	‘It	is	right	that	he	should
go,	I	know.	It	is	difficult	for	a	mother	to	see	her	son	ride	to	war	but	he	will	soon	be	a	man.	 I	 must
remind	 myself	 I	 was	 only	 two	 years	 older	 when	 I	 left	 my	 family	 to	 share	 your	 life	 and	 the	 many
dangers	that	accompanied	it	–	a	thing	I	have	never	regretted.’
As	she	spoke,	Humayun	had	realised	why,	despite	the	many	other	women	he	had	known,	Hamida
was	 the	 one	 true	 love	 of	 his	 life.	 He	 had	 embraced	 her	 and	 together	 they	 had	 made	 love	 long	 and
tenderly.
Humayun	 forced	 himself	 back	 to	 the	 present.	 It	 was	 time	 to	 tell	 his	 son	 of	 his	 decision.	 ‘Akbar,
would	you	wish	to	accompany	me	as	I	go	to	recover	our	inheritance?’
Without	a	moment’s	hesitation,	Akbar	answered	simply,	‘Yes,	Father.’
‘Aren’t	you	afraid?’
‘A	 little	 bit,	 but	 somehow	 I	 know	 inside	 myself	 it	 is	 right.	 It’s	 my	 destiny	 .	 .	 .	 Besides,’	 and	 a
youthful	grin	lit	up	his	face,	‘it	will	be	a	great	adventure	and	no	adventure	is	without	danger	–	that	I
already	know.	I	will	make	you	and	my	mother	proud	of	me.’
‘I	know	you	will.’
By	now,	musketeers	were	marching	below	in	disciplined	ranks,	some	on	horseback	with	their	long
weapons	tied	to	their	saddles,	others	on	foot	with	them	over	their	shoulders.
‘How	will	the	men	on	foot	keep	up,	Father?’
‘They	 will	 be	 able	 to	 march	 as	 fast	 as	 the	 oxen	 who	 pull	 the	 cannon.	 Besides,	 we’ll	 gather	 more
horses	as	we	advance.	We’ll	use	rafts	on	rivers	such	as	the	Kabul	to	speed	us	on	our	way	and	to	carry
the	heavy	baggage	and	cannon.	Those	on	foot	can	ride	on	them	too.	I’ve	already	given	instructions
for	rafts	to	be	built	for	the	Kabul	river	with	special	mountings	constructed	for	the	oars	and	for	the
steering	rudders.’
Two	nights	later,	Humayun	lay	with	his	arm	across	Hamida’s	smooth,	naked	body.	They	had	just
made	 love	 and	 Humayun	 felt	 that	 never	 before	 had	 the	 act	 made	 them	 so	 truly	 one.	 Perhaps	 it	 was
because	of	the	knowledge	they	shared	that	Humayun	and	Akbar	were	to	set	off	on	their	campaign	the
next	morning.
Hamida	lifted	herself	on	one	elbow	and	looked	fondly	into	Humayun’s	dark	eyes.	‘You	will	protect
yourself	and	our	son	as	best	you	can,	won’t	you?	It’s	more	difficult	than	you	realise	to	be	a	woman,
left	behind	waiting	and	watching	for	the	next	post	runner,	scrutinising	his	face	and,	if	it	looks	drawn,
wondering	whether	it	reflects	merely	fatigue	from	the	journey	or	bad	news.	Sometimes	you	go	to	bed
and	try	to	sleep,	attempting	to	guess	what	is	happening,	knowing	that	any	news	that	comes,	good	or
bad,	will	be	many	weeks	old	and	that	the	loved	one	you	are	thinking	about	may	already	be	dead	and
you	an	unknowing	widow.’
Humayun	touched	her	lips	with	his	index	finger	and	then	kissed	them	long	and	hard.	‘I	know	Akbar
and	I	will	live	and	–	more	than	that	–	that	we	will	be	victorious	and	you	will	be	my	empress	in	the
palace	 at	 Agra.	 I	 feel	 it	 deep	 within	 me.	 This	 is	 my	 great	 chance	 to	 redeem	 my	 past	 failures	 and
reclaim	my	father ’s	throne	to	make	it	safe	for	Akbar,	and	I	will	take	it.’
Hamida	 smiled	 and	 Humayun	 pulled	 her	 towards	 him	 and	 they	 began	 to	 make	 love	 once	 more,
moving	slowly	at	first	and	then	faster	and	faster	in	passionate	and	all-consuming	union.

Humayun	 sat	 on	 his	 black	 horse	 on	 the	 south	 bank	 of	 the	 Indus.	 A	 chill	 wind	 blowing	 from	 the
Himalayas	 in	 the	 north	 ruffled	 his	 hair.	 As	 he	 watched,	 on	 the	 north	 shore	 –	 already	 churned	 into
sticky	mud	by	the	passage	of	many	men	and	horses	–	twenty	or	so	of	his	gunners	pulled	and	heaved	at
the	yokes	of	a	team	of	oxen	hauling	one	of	his	great	bronze	cannon.	They	were	using	their	whips	as
well	as	shouts	of	encouragement	to	persuade	the	reluctant	beasts	to	set	foot	on	the	bobbing	bridge	of
rafts	and	boats	Humayun	and	his	men	had	constructed	over	the	river,	which	at	this	point	was	nearly
two	hundred	feet	wide.
Humayun	had	learned	from	his	father ’s	experience	and	chosen	a	point	just	downstream	from	where
a	right-angled	bend	in	the	river	slowed	its	force.	In	the	six	weeks	since	he	had	left	Kabul,	the	oared
rafts	 he	 had	 had	 manufactured	 in	 advance	 had	 speeded	 him	 down	 the	 Kabul	 river	 through	 the	 grey,
barren	 mountains	 even	 faster	 than	 he	 had	 anticipated.	 They	 had	 been	 so	 useful,	 in	 fact,	 that
remembering	his	father ’s	difficulty	in	assembling	enough	boats	to	cross	the	great	barrier	of	the	Indus
and	conscious	all	the	time	that	he	must	move	fast	if	he	were	not	to	lose	his	opportunity,	Humayun	had
had	half	the	rafts	dismantled	and	put	on	the	backs	of	pack	animals	for	the	journey	into	Hindustan	so
that	they	could	be	used	again	for	his	Indus	bridge.	He	was	glad	he	had	done	so	since,	although	he	had
managed	to	secure	some	boats,	nearly	half	his	makeshift	bridge	consisted	of	his	rafts	or	components
from	them.	They	had	been	lashed	together	through	the	ingenuity	of	his	engineers	during	the	past	three
days	since	he	had	reached	the	shores	of	the	river.	Humayun	had	joined	in,	standing	waist-deep	in	the
cold	 water,	 encouraging	 his	 men,	 himself	 twisting	 and	 knotting	 leather	 thongs	 with	 fingers	 which
soon	grew	blue	and	numb	with	cold.
Now	he	saw	with	relief	that	the	first	pair	of	grey	oxen	was	moving	on	to	the	bridge	and	that	the	rest
of	the	team	were	following.	More	of	his	gunners	were	pushing	and	heaving	at	the	four	large	wooden
wheels	of	the	cannon’s	limber	to	help	the	oxen	propel	it	through	the	mud	on	to	the	bridge.	As	they	did
so,	the	bridge	sank	much	lower	into	the	water	beneath	the	weight.	However,	within	less	than	a	minute,
cannon,	men	and	beasts	were	across	and	the	next	team	of	oxen	was	being	encouraged	down	the	north
bank	to	begin	the	whole	procedure	over	again.
All	of	a	sudden	Humayun	heard	a	trumpet	sound	out	from	one	of	the	circle	of	pickets	he	had	placed
on	the	low	hills	bordering	the	southern	banks	to	warn	of	anyone	drawing	near	during	the	crossing.
The	first	call	was	followed	by	a	second	and	then	a	third	–	the	signal	he	and	Ahmed	Khan	had	agreed
would	warn	of	the	approach	of	a	large	body	of	men.
‘Stop	any	more	cannon	being	transported	across	the	bridge	while	we	investigate	what	the	pickets
have	 seen.	 Throw	 out	 a	 further	 screen	 of	 horsemen	 and	 have	 our	 musketeers	 load	 and	 prime	 their
weapons.’
Gesturing	to	his	bodyguard	to	follow,	Humayun	urged	his	black	horse	into	a	gallop	and	soon	he
was	on	the	low	hill	from	which	the	trumpeter	had	sounded	the	alarm.	Humayun	immediately	saw	why
he	 had	 done	 so.	 About	 three-quarters	 of	 a	 mile	 away,	 riding	 up	 from	 the	 south	 –	 the	 direction	 of
Hindustan	 –	 was	 a	 large	 party	 of	 mounted	 men.	 Even	 at	 this	 distance	 Humayun	 could	 make	 out	 the
tops	 of	 their	 lances	 glistening	 in	 the	 sunlight	 and	 flags	 fluttering	 as	 the	 horsemen	 advanced.	 The
riders,	 who	 probably	 numbered	 around	 a	 hundred,	 seemed	 to	 be	 cantering	 rather	 than	 galloping	 as
they	would	if	they	intended	to	attack.	Humayun,	however,	was	taking	no	chances.
‘Make	sure	we	get	musketeers	and	archers	into	firing	positions	quickly,’	he	shouted	to	one	of	his

officers.	As	the	horsemen	came	nearer	Humayun	could	see	that	they	were	unhelmeted	and	that	their
weapons	remained	sheathed.When	they	were	about	three	hundred	yards	away	they	halted	and	after	a
minute	or	so	one	man	rode	slowly	forward	alone	on	his	grey	horse.	He	was	clearly	an	ambassador	or
herald	of	some	kind	and	Humayun	ordered	two	of	his	bodyguards	to	ride	out	in	front	of	his	line	to
bring	the	man	to	him.
Within	five	minutes,	the	rider	–	a	tall,	slim	youth	dressed	in	cream	robes	and	wearing	a	heavy	gold
chain	round	his	neck	–	was	brought	before	Humayun.	Seemingly	oblivious	of	the	dirt	and	stones	he
prostrated	himself	face	down,	arms	widespread,	before	Humayun,	who	was	still	mounted	on	his	black
horse	which	was	restlessly	pawing	at	the	stony	ground	with	its	front	hooves.
‘Who	are	you?	What	do	you	want?’
‘I	am	Murad	Beg,	the	eldest	son	of	Uzad	Beg,	the	Sultan	of	Multan.	I	come	from	my	father	who
waits	 with	 his	 bodyguard	 over	 there.	 He	 seeks	 your	 permission	 to	 approach	 and	 offer	 you,	 his
overlord,	 his	 obeisance.	 He	 wishes	 to	 pledge	 his	 troops	 to	 you	 to	 assist	 in	 the	 recapture	 of	 your
rightful	throne	of	Hindustan.’
Hearing	 the	 name	 of	 Uzad	 Beg,	 Humayun	 smiled.	 During	 his	 descent	 of	 the	 Kabul	 river	 and	 the
Khyber	 Pass,	 many	 tribal	 chieftains	 had	 come	 to	 submit	 to	 him.	 Some	 had	 even	 followed	 the	 old
tradition	 of	 appearing	 before	 Akbar	 and	 himself	 with	 grass	 in	 their	 mouths	 to	 show	 that	 they	 were
Humayun’s	 beasts	 of	 burden,	 his	 oxen,	 to	 do	 with	 whatever	 he	 would.	 In	 each	 case,	 Humayun	 had
welcomed	them	and	their	men	as	useful	additions	to	his	army.
However,	 Uzad	 Beg	 was	 different.	 He	 was	 no	 small	 tribal	 chieftain	 but	 a	 sophisticated	 and	 wily
ruler.	Fifteen	years	previously,	after	the	battle	of	Chausa,	Humayun	had	sent	emissaries	to	him	asking
for	 troops	 to	 help	 halt	 Sher	 Shah’s	 advance,	 but	 Uzad	 Beg	 had	 been	 one	 of	 the	 most	 assiduous
prevaricators.	 His	 repertoire	 of	 excuses	 had	 varied	 from	 personal	 illnesses	 through	 the	 need	 to
suppress	 rebellions	 to	 a	 fire	 in	 his	 fortress-palace.	 Later	 Humayun	 had	 heard	 he’d	 been	 one	 of	 the
first	 to	 recognise	 Sher	 Shah	 as	 his	 overlord.	 That	 he	 was	 now	 rushing	 to	 offer	 his	 submission	 to
Humayun	once	more	was	a	real	indication	that	victory	was	expected	to	be	his	and	that	soon	he	would
again	sit	on	the	imperial	throne.	Humayun	realised	that	this	was	no	time	to	settle	old	scores	but	rather
to	conciliate	his	former	vassals	and	subjects	to	be	sure	that	peace	ruled	in	his	rear	as	he	advanced	on
Delhi	 and	 Agra.	 Besides,	 if	 he	 recalled	 correctly,	 Uzad	 Beg’s	 men	 were	 doughty,	 well-equipped
fighters	 when	 their	 ruler	 could	 be	 persuaded	 to	 commit	 them	 to	 battle	 rather	 than	 to	 sit	 on	 the
sidelines	 until	 the	 outcome	 was	 clear.	 Nevertheless,	 thought	 Humayun,	 he	 would	 make	 Uzad	 Beg
sweat	just	a	little	.	.	.
‘I	remember	your	father	well.	I	am	glad	that	his	health,	which	he	used	to	write	to	me	was	such	a
trouble	to	him,	has	improved	so	much	over	the	years	that	he	is	able	to	visit	me	in	person.	You	may	tell
him	that	I	will	be	delighted	to	receive	him	in	an	hour ’s	time,	just	before	sunset,	when	my	camp	will	be
better	equipped	for	the	reception	of	such	an	important	vassal	as	he.’
‘Majesty,	I	will	tell	him	so.’
Just	 over	 an	 hour	 later,	 Humayun,	 dressed	 as	 befitted	 an	 emperor,	 was	 sitting	 beneath	 the	 scarlet
awning	 of	 his	 command	 tent	 on	 a	 gilded	 throne	 with	 Akbar	 seated	 at	 his	 side	 on	 a	 low	 stool.
Humayun’s	commanders	were	arranged	on	either	side	of	his	throne,	behind	which	stood	two	greenturbaned	bodyguards	with	shining	steel	breastplates.	The	sunset	was	colouring	the	sky	pink	and	purple
as	Uzad	Beg	approached,	accompanied	by	his	son	and	flanked	by	an	escort	of	Humayun’s	guards.	As
soon	as	they	reached	him,	Uzad	Beg	and	his	son	prostrated	themselves	full-length.	He	allowed	them
to	remain	face	down	on	the	cold,	damp	ground	for	just	a	little	longer	than	he	thought	they	might	have
anticipated.	Then	he	spoke.

‘Rise,	both	of	you.’
As	 Uzad	 Beg	 did	 so,	 Humayun	 saw	 that	 his	 vassal’s	 hair	 and	 beard	 were	 now	 white	 and	 his
shoulders	a	little	stooped,	and	that	a	pot	belly	strained	the	ties	of	his	green	silk	under-tunic.	Almost
unconsciously	Humayun	pulled	in	his	own	already	much	flatter	stomach	and	began.
‘I	am	glad	to	see	you	again	after	all	these	years.	What	brings	you	before	me?’
‘I	 thank	 God	 he	 has	 preserved	 Your	 Majesty	 and	 that	 I	 have	 kept	 my	 own	 worthless	 life	 long
enough	 to	 greet	 you	 on	 your	 journey	 to	 recover	 your	 rightful	 throne.	 I	 come	 to	 offer	 you,	 my
overlord,	my	humble	submission	and	that	of	my	people.’	Uzad	Beg	paused	and	gestured	to	one	of	his
attendants	who	had	followed	him	at	a	distance.	‘If	I	may,	Majesty,	let	this	man	approach.’
Humayun	nodded	his	assent	and	the	servant	came	forward	to	Uzad	Beg	with	a	large	ivory	casket	on
a	gold	cushion.	Uzad	Beg	extracted	from	it	a	golden	drinking	cup	set	with	rubies	which	he	held	out	to
Humayun.
‘I	bring	you	this	gift,	Majesty,	as	a	small	token	of	my	loyalty.’
‘I	thank	you.	I	am	also	pleased	that	you	have	come	to	recognise	me	as	your	overlord	once	more.
You	were	not	always	so	ready	to	answer	my	call.’
Uzad	Beg	flushed.	‘Majesty,	circumstances	alone	prevented	me	for	a	while,	and	after	that	you	had
left	Hindustan.’
‘You	could	have	followed	me	into	exile.’
‘I	had	my	throne	and	family	to	protect,’	Uzad	Beg	stammered.
Humayun	decided	that	enough	was	enough.‘Circumstances	have	conspired	against	us	all	over	the
last	 years.	 Bygones	 must	 be	 bygones.	 I	 am	 glad	 that	 you	 offer	 your	 submission	 once	 more	 and	 I
accept	it	in	the	spirit	in	which	it	is	rendered.	How	many	men	can	you	contribute	to	my	forces?’
‘Eight	hundred	well-equipped	cavalry	can	join	you	within	days	on	your	march	south.’
‘I	 would	 like	 your	 son	 here	 to	 come	 as	 their	 commander,’	 Humayun	 said,	 conscious	 that	 the
presence	of	Murad	Beg	with	his	army	would	be	an	effective	guarantee	of	his	father ’s	good	behaviour.
‘I	was	going	to	suggest	it	myself,	Majesty.’

The	early	April	sun	had	only	been	up	for	three	hours	when	Humayun	with	Akbar	and	Bairam	Khan	at
his	side	breasted	the	crest	of	the	last	of	a	series	of	high	ridges	in	the	Punjab	and	saw	before	him	the
massive	 sandstone	 fortress	 of	 Rohtas.	 It	 sat	 on	 the	 top	 of	 a	 low	 rocky	 outcrop	 on	 the	 plain	 below,
overlooking	 the	 junction	 of	 roads	 leading	 south	 from	 the	 north	 and	 east.	 As	 he	 had	 pushed	 further
into	 Hindustan,	 Humayun	 had	 still	 faced	 no	 significant	 opposition.	 Instead,	 Uzad	 Beg	 had	 been
followed	 by	 many	 other	 defecting	 vassals	 of	 Islam	 Shah.	 So	 vehement	 had	 they	 been	 in	 their
denunciation	 of	 their	 former	 overlord	 and	 in	 their	 vows	 of	 loyalty	 and	 support	 that	 Humayun	 had
subsequently	advised	young	Akbar	never	to	take	such	protestations	at	face	value.	After	all,	several	had
previously	shifted	their	loyalty	to	Sher	Shah	from	Humayun	and,	as	Akbar	had	observed	to	his	father,
these	 had	 been	 particularly	 unctuous	 in	 their	 present	 praise	 and	 professions	 of	 loyalty.	 Humayun’s
army	when	it	crossed	the	Indus	had	already	nearly	doubled	in	size	to	twenty	thousand	since	leaving
Kabul.	Now	it	numbered	nearly	thirty-five	thousand	men	with	more	recruits	arriving	every	day.
‘Father,	the	fortress	gates	are	closed.	There	are	armed	men	on	the	walls	and	I	see	the	smoke	from
cooking	fires.	Do	we	need	to	take	the	fortress	or	can	we	bypass	it?’	asked	Akbar.

‘It’s	 one	 of	 the	 keys	 to	 the	 control	 of	 northern	 Hindustan.	 We	 cannot	 leave	 it	 in	 the	 hands	 of	 an
enemy	who	might	sally	forth	at	any	time	to	attack	our	rear,	so	take	it	we	must.	However,	the	defenders
are	rumoured	to	be	only	few	in	number.	They	have	no	prospect	of	any	relieving	force	and	will	not
relish	dying	in	a	hopeless	cause.	I	intend	to	see	what	an	initial	show	of	strength	will	do.	Bairam	Khan,
have	 our	 cannon	 deployed	 in	 front	 of	 the	 fortress	 just	 out	 of	 musket	 range	 but	 where	 they	 can	 do
some	damage	to	the	lower	walls	and	the	main	gateway.	Have	our	horsemen	encircle	the	outcrop	and
have	 our	 musketeers	 and	 archers	 form	 up	 behind	 the	 cannon	 so	 that	 the	 defenders	 may	 see	 their
number.’
Within	 two	 hours,	 teams	 of	 straining	 oxen	 had	 pulled	 the	 Moghul	 cannon	 into	 place	 and	 the
encirclement	of	Rohtas	had	been	completed	by	Humayun’s	horsemen,	their	green	pennants	fluttering
in	 the	 spring	 breeze.	 During	 this	 time,	 although	 there	 had	 been	 much	 movement	 on	 the	 walls,	 the
defenders	made	no	attempt	to	make	a	sortie	to	disrupt	their	besiegers.	When	he	saw	everything	was	in
place	 Humayun	 commanded	 Bairam	 Khan,	 ‘Order	 the	 cannon	 to	 fire	 at	 the	 gates.	 Once	 there	 is
enough	 smoke	 billowing	 around,	 have	 some	 of	 our	 musketeers	 advance	 under	 its	 cover	 to	 within
range	 and	 attempt	 to	 pick	 off	 any	 who	 show	 themselves	 above	 those	 crenellated	 battlements.	 In	 the
meantime	have	our	scribes	write	messages	offering	the	defenders	safe	passage	if	they	leave	within	an
hour.	After	we’ve	shown	them	a	little	of	what	we’re	capable	of,	we’ll	have	our	best	archers	fire	the
surrender	offers	into	the	city.’
Almost	 immediately	 a	 loud	 boom	 echoed	 across	 the	 plains	 as	 the	 gunners	 pressed	 their	 lighted
tapers	to	the	firing	holes	of	the	bronze	cannon.	Some	of	the	first	shots	were	too	low,	crashing	into	the
lower	slopes	of	the	outcrop	and	sending	showers	of	earth	and	shards	of	rock	into	the	air	rather	than
damaging	 the	 walls	 and	 gates.	 Sweating	 and	 stripped	 to	 the	 waist	 as	 the	 day	 began	 to	 warm,	 the
gunners	 rushed	 to	 change	 the	 cannons’	 elevation	 by	 packing	 stones	 beneath	 the	 wheels	 or
manhandling	smaller	weapons	up	mounds	of	earth.	As	they	did	so,	a	few	musket	shots	rang	from	the
towering	battlements	but	the	range	was,	as	Humayun	had	planned,	too	great	for	them.
However,	some	of	the	arrows	the	defenders	fired	from	bows	pointed	high	into	the	air	to	increase
their	range	did	reach	the	cannon.	As	they	dropped	from	the	cloudless	sky,	most	thudded	harmlessly
into	the	ground	but	several	oxen	were	hit,	blood	staining	their	dun-coloured	coats,	and	Humayun	saw
one	 of	 his	 gunners	 being	 helped	 away,	 two	 black-shafted	 arrows	 stuck	 into	 his	 back	 where	 he	 had
been	hit	while	straining	to	push	a	cannon	into	place.	Soon,	the	cannon	were	firing	again	and	regularly
hitting	the	stone	walls	flanking	the	gate.	A	pall	of	white	smoke	hung	over	the	cannon	like	the	early
morning	mist	that	formed	in	the	valleys	near	Kabul.
Humayun	 continued	 to	 watch	 as	 a	 band	 of	 his	 musketeers	 ran	 forward	 into	 the	 smoke,	 their
weapons	and	firing	tripods	at	the	ready.	They	were	followed	by	some	of	his	archers	with	their	double
bows	in	their	hands	and	full	quivers	on	their	backs.	A	minute	or	two	later,	a	body	fell,	arms	flailing,
from	the	battlements	to	crash	on	to	the	rocks	below.	It	was	followed	by	another	clawing	at	the	air,	this
time	with	an	arrow	clearly	visible	protruding	from	its	neck.	No	more	puffs	of	smoke	came	from	the
muskets	of	the	defenders	on	the	walls	and	the	number	of	arrows	dwindled	while	the	gates	of	Rohtas
remained	firmly	shut.
‘The	defenders	clearly	have	little	stomach	for	the	fight,	as	we	suspected.	Have	those	archers	with
the	 message	 offering	 surrender	 terms	 attached	 to	 their	 arrows	 advance	 and	 fire	 them	 into	 the	 city,’
Humayun	 commanded.	 Within	 a	 few	 minutes	 he	 saw	 the	 arrows	 fly	 into	 the	 air,	 most	 of	 them
overtopping	the	walls	and	landing	within	the	fort.
Scarcely	two	hours	later,	with	Akbar	at	his	side,	Humayun	rode	through	the	tall,	iron-studded	gates
of	 Rohtas	 and	 into	 the	 silent,	 deserted	 courtyard	 of	 the	 fortress,	 which	 was	 strewn	 with	 abandoned

weapons	and	items	of	heavy	equipment.	Having	seen	the	strength	of	Humayun’s	army,	the	defenders
had	 immediately	 appreciated	 the	 generosity	 of	 the	 surrender	 offer.	 Within	 a	 few	 minutes	 the	 great
thick	wooden	gates	had	creaked	open	and	the	garrison	had	begun	to	stream	through	them,	some	on
foot	 and	 some	 on	 horseback,	 carrying	 what	 valuables	 they	 could	 and	 all	 heading	 south,	 leaving
Humayun	master	of	this	gateway	to	Hindustan.
Humayun	ordered	some	of	the	officers	of	his	bodyguard	to	check	that	all	the	garrison	had	indeed
departed	 and	 that	 none	 lurked	 in	 ambush.	 Receiving	 their	 swift	 confirmation,	 Humayun	 walked
towards	the	open	doors	of	the	fortress’s	great	hall.	As	he	did	so,	he	glanced	to	his	right	where	he	saw
that	charcoal	fires	were	still	glowing	beneath	some	clay	tandoor	ovens.	Looking	inside	one,	he	found
several	loaves	of	warm,	unleavened	bread.	He	took	one,	bit	a	small	portion	from	it	and	then	handed	it
to	Akbar.
‘Enjoy	it.	It	tastes	of	victory.’

Chapter	25
Shock	and	Awe
‘Humayun	Padishah!	Long	live	Emperor	Humayun!’The	cries	of	the	citizens	of	Lahore	rang	out	all
around	as,	one	warm	late	February	day	in	1555,	Humayun	and	Akbar	made	their	triumphal	entry	into
the	 city	 in	 a	 gilded	 howdah	 atop	 a	 tall	 elephant,	 whose	 long	 saddle	 cloth	 embroidered	 with	 golden
thread	and	set	with	pearls	swept	the	dust	of	the	city’s	wide	streets.At	the	head	of	the	procession	was	a
squadron	 of	 Humayun’s	 best	 cavalry,	 all	 riding	 on	 black	 horses	 and	 all	 wearing	 turbans	 of	 goldcoloured	cloth.	The	afternoon	sun	glinted	on	the	steel	points	of	the	long	lances	they	held	vertically	as
they	 rode.	 Behind	 them,	 just	 in	 front	 of	 Humayun,	 six	 mounted	 trumpeters	 and	 six	 drummers	 with
small	 kettledrums	 on	 either	 side	 of	 their	 saddlebows	 played	 with	 skill	 and	 vigour.	 Their	 music,
together	with	the	roar	of	the	crowd,	made	it	difficult	for	Humayun	to	hear	Akbar ’s	words.
‘Father,	 ever	 since	 we	 left	 Kabul	 we	 have	 fought	 only	 skirmishes.	 All	 the	 major	 fortresses	 like
Rohtas	 have	 surrendered	 at	 our	 approach	 and	 now	 this	 great	 city	 of	 Lahore	 has	 too.	 How	 much
further	can	we	go	into	Hindustan	without	a	real	battle?’
‘Not	far,	I	think.	We’ll	soon	be	entering	what	were	the	heartlands	of	Sher	Shah’s	and	Islam	Shah’s
dominions.	The	three	contenders	for	their	throne	will	have	heard	of	our	advance	and	will	know	that
we	–	the	rightful	rulers	of	Hindustan	–	are	a	greater	threat	than	any	of	their	fellow	pretenders.	One	or
all	of	them	will	turn	aside	from	their	squabbles	to	attack	us.’
‘D’you	think	they	will	unite	against	us?’
‘Possibly,	 but	 the	 amount	 of	 death	 and	 destruction	 they	 have	 inflicted	 on	 each	 other	 makes	 that
unlikely.	However,	each	will	be	a	formidable	opponent	in	his	own	right.’
‘How	long	will	we	stay	in	Lahore?’
‘Only	 long	 enough	 to	 have	 the	 chief	 mullah	 proclaim	 me	 emperor	 once	 more	 by	 reading	 the
khutba	–	the	sermon	–	in	my	name	at	the	Friday	service	in	the	mosque.	Look,	you	can	see	its	two	tall
minarets	over	there	through	the	palm	trees.	We	need	to	keep	up	the	impetus	of	our	advance.	Too	often
I’ve	delayed	and	let	my	opponents	seize	the	initiative.’
Two	weeks	later,	as,	shrouded	in	early	morning	mist,	his	troops	were	lighting	their	cooking	fires
to	prepare	their	early	meal,	Humayun	sat	with	his	military	council	around	him	in	his	scarlet	tent	at	the
centre	 of	 his	 camp.	 Since	 leaving	 Lahore	 eight	 days	 earlier,	 he	 and	 his	 army	 had	 advanced	 ninety
miles	southeast,	ever	deeper	into	Hindustan	across	the	featureless,	red	plains.
‘You	 are	 certain,	 Ahmed	 Khan,	 that	 the	 forces	 of	 Adil	 Shah	 are	 heading	 east	 across	 our	 line	 of
march?’
‘Yes.	Five	days	ago	they	had	the	worst	of	another	encounter	with	the	army	of	their	rival	Sekunder
Shah	and	now	they	are	hastening	towards	their	stronghold	in	the	fortress	of	Sundarnagar	to	regather
their	strength.’
‘How	far	away	are	they?’
‘Perhaps	eight	miles	ahead	of	us,	Majesty.’
‘How	many	of	them	are	there?’

‘Ten	 thousand	 or	 so,	 nearly	 all	 mounted.	 They	 have	 abandoned	 most	 of	 their	 cannon	 and	 heavy
equipment.’
‘Do	they	have	pickets	and	outriders	posted?’
‘Only	 a	 very	 few,	 Majesty;	 they	 are	 in	 too	 much	 disorder.	 They	 paused	 merely	 for	 a	 few	 hours
overnight	 to	 snatch	 some	 sleep	 and	 were	 in	 the	 saddle	 again	 before	 dawn.	 Their	 minds	 seem
concentrated	only	on	reaching	Sundarnagar	as	speedily	as	possible.’
‘Then	 let	 us	 attack	 immediately,	 taking	 advantage	 of	 the	 cover	 of	 the	 mist	 while	 it	 lasts.	 Tell	 the
men	to	douse	their	cooking	fires.	There	is	no	time	to	eat.	We	will	take	mounted	cavalry	and	archers.
Also,	order	some	of	the	cavalrymen	to	take	musketeers	up	behind	them	on	their	horses.You,	Bairam
Khan,	 will	 remain	 with	 Akbar	 in	 charge	 of	 the	 camp.	 Ensure	 you	 establish	 good	 defences	 and	 post
pickets.	I	expect	to	win	but	the	camp	must	be	strongly	protected	in	case	Adil	Shah	evades	us	or	for	any
reason	secures	a	temporary	advantage.’
Two	hours	later,	the	mist	had	entirely	evaporated.	Humayun	–	who	had	ridden	a	mile	or	so	ahead	of
his	advancing	main	force	with	Ahmed	Khan	and	a	party	of	his	scouts	–	looked	over	the	low	mud	wall
of	a	small	village	inhabited	by	a	few	poor	farmers	and	their	goats	and	chickens.	Shielding	his	eyes
with	 his	 hands	 against	 the	 sun’s	 glare,	 he	 saw	 about	 three-quarters	 of	 a	 mile	 away	 a	 large	 cloud	 of
dust	billowing	as	it	crossed	from	right	to	left	in	front	of	him.	Within	the	dust	cloud,	Humayun	could
just	distinguish	the	shapes	of	riders	and	a	few	small	baggage	wagons	pulled	by	mules	or	oxen.	Two
large	 banners	 fluttered	 at	 the	 head	 of	 the	 column.	 At	 this	 distance	 and	 through	 the	 dust,	 Humayun
found	 it	 difficult	 to	 make	 out	 their	 colour,	 let	 alone	 any	 device	 on	 them,	 but	 it	 could	 only	 be	 Adil
Shah’s	forces.They	had	no	scouts	posted	and	appeared	as	yet	oblivious	of	any	danger.
‘Send	orders	back	to	Nadim	Khwaja	to	take	his	division	of	cavalry	and	attack	the	rear.	Tell	Zahid
Beg	to	bring	his	men	here	and	I	will	lead	them	in	an	attack	on	the	vanguard.	Additionally,	let	those
horsemen	who	have	musketeers	with	them	ride	straightaway	to	within	a	hundred	yards	of	the	enemy
line	of	march	and	there	let	the	musketeers	add	to	our	opponents’	discomfort.’
Soon,	Humayun’s	musketeers	were	dismounting	to	place	their	long	muskets	on	their	firing	tripods
and	 Humayun	 and	 his	 troops	 were	 almost	 on	 Adil	 Shah’s	 vanguard.	 At	 the	 last	 moment	 their
opponents	 had	 suddenly	 become	 aware	 of	 them	 and	 were	 turning	 to	 face	 them,	 unsheathing	 their
weapons	 as	 they	 did	 so.	 Officers	 were	 shouting	 orders	 to	 close	 ranks	 and	 to	 prepare	 to	 receive	 the
attacks.	Almost	immediately,	Humayun’s	musketeers	fired	their	first	volley,	which	knocked	some	of
Adil	Shah’s	men	from	their	saddles	and	wounded	and	panicked	some	of	their	horses.
Moments	later,	Humayun	at	the	head	of	his	cavalry	thudded	into	their	vanguard.	His	first	action	was
to	cut	down	one	of	the	two	banner	holders	with	a	sword	swipe	to	the	head.	As	the	man	fell	backwards,
he	dropped	his	great	banner,	which	Humayun	could	now	see	was	orange	with	a	gold	sun	on	it.	The
long	cloth	twisted	around	the	legs	of	Humayun’s	black	horse	and	it	stumbled.	Humayun,	caught	off
balance	as	he	leaned	from	the	saddle	to	aim	a	sword	stroke	at	the	second	banner	carrier,	fell.	As	he
landed	on	the	hard	ground,	his	sword	was	knocked	from	his	grasp.
Another	 of	 Adil	 Shah’s	 men,	 a	 stocky	 officer	 wearing	 a	 domed	 helmet	 with	 an	 orange	 plume,
reacted	more	swiftly	than	Humayun’s	bodyguard.	He	kicked	his	chestnut	horse	towards	Humayun	and
attempted	to	impale	him	on	his	long	lance.	Humayun	rolled	quickly	away,	throwing	off	his	gauntlet	as
he	did	so	and	trying	to	extract	his	dagger	from	its	jewelled	scabbard	hanging	at	his	waist.	After	what
seemed	an	age,	he	tugged	it	free	and	threw	the	foot-long	weapon	with	all	his	force	at	the	throat	of	the
horse	of	his	opponent,	who	was	attempting	to	ride	him	down	once	more.	The	point	of	the	dagger	hit
its	 mark	 and	 the	 horse,	 bleeding	 profusely,	 staggered	 and	 collapsed,	 throwing	 its	 rider,	 who	 hit	 the
earth	with	a	thump.

Humayun	was	by	now	on	his	feet	and	rushed	over	to	the	winded	officer,	who	had	lost	his	helmet	in
the	fall.	Humayun	grabbed	him	round	his	thick	neck	as	he	too	attempted	to	stand.	For	some	seconds
they	fought	as	the	officer	tried	to	extract	himself	from	Humayun’s	headlock.	Then	he	bit	hard	into	the
bare	flesh	of	Humayun’s	wrist	and	hand,	drawing	blood.	Humayun	relaxed	his	grip	slightly	and	the
officer	wrenched	his	head	free.
Half	smiling	through	teeth	flecked	with	Humayun’s	blood,	he	immediately	kicked	out	at	Humayun’s
groin.	But	Humayun	leaped	back	and	his	opponent	missed,	throwing	himself	off	balance.	Humayun
swept	the	man’s	trailing	leg	from	beneath	him	and,	as	he	fell,	leaped	upon	him,	landing	with	his	knees
on	his	opponent’s	chest.	The	officer,	although	winded	again,	in	turn	succeeded	in	kneeing	Humayun
in	the	back	and	dislodging	him.They	rolled	over	and	over	in	the	dust	together	until	Humayun	used	his
superior	strength	and	agility	to	get	both	his	hands	firmly	round	his	opponent’s	neck.	Deliberately	he
pressed	his	thumbs	into	the	man’s	windpipe	as	hard	as	he	could	and	twisted	his	neck	sharply.	There
was	 a	 loud	 crack	 and	 slowly	 the	 officer ’s	 face	 suffused	 with	 purple	 and	 his	 bulging	 eyes	 grew
unfocused	as	he	ceased	to	struggle.Throwing	the	limp	body	aside,	Humayun	scrambled	to	his	feet	and
retrieved	his	sword.	Grimly	he	realised	that	without	the	training	of	his	wrestling	bouts	with	Bayzid
Khan	he	might	not	have	prevailed.	It	would	have	been	very	difficult	in	the	press	of	the	fight	for	his
bodyguard	to	protect	him	once	he	was	unhorsed.
These	same	bodyguards	were	by	now	gathering	round	and	Humayun	saw	that	many	of	Adil	Shah’s
men	were	already	fleeing.	Others	were	surrendering.	It	was	still	less	than	an	hour	since	he	had	first
seen	Adil	Shah’s	army,	phantoms	in	the	dust,	from	the	shelter	of	the	farmers’	village.	Now	they	were
in	 complete	 confusion	 and	 disarray,	 as	 were	 Adil	 Shah’s	 chances	 of	 making	 good	 his	 claim	 to	 the
throne	of	Hindustan.
‘Pursue	our	enemies.	Capture	as	many	animals	and	as	much	equipment	as	you	can.	We	will	need
them	for	the	harder	fights	that	surely	lie	ahead.	If	you	capture	Adil	Shah	show	him	no	mercy,	as	he
showed	none	to	his	young	nephew.’
Three	hours	after	the	battle,	some	of	the	troops	Humayun	had	sent	in	pursuit	of	his	defeated	enemy
returned.	Humayun	saw	that	one	of	them	was	leading	a	horse	with	a	body	slung	across	its	back,	the
arms	and	legs	tied	together	beneath	the	animal’s	belly.	The	rider	leading	the	group	dismounted	and
bowed	low	before	Humayun.	‘It’s	Adil	Shah,	Majesty.	Members	of	his	bodyguard	whom	we	overtook
only	two	or	three	miles	from	here	surrendered	the	body	to	us.	They	told	us	that	he	had	died	a	short
time	before	from	a	chest	wound	inflicted	by	a	musket	ball	at	the	beginning	of	the	battle.’
Humayun	 walked	 over	 to	 the	 corpse	 and,	 pulling	 the	 head	 back,	 looked	 into	 his	 opponent’s	 face.
Beneath	the	caked	blood	and	dirt,	Adil	Shah	looked	ordinary.	Humayun	could	see	no	outward	trace	of
the	wicked	depth	of	his	ambition	which	had	led	him	to	slaughter	his	sister ’s	son.	Letting	Adil	Shah’s
head	drop,	he	suppressed	the	temptation	welling	within	him	to	show	his	contempt	for	his	enemy	by
leaving	his	corpse	unburied	for	the	birds	and	pariah	dogs	to	feed	on.	Instead,	he	turned	away	with	a
curt	instruction,	‘Inter	him	in	an	unmarked	grave.’
That	night,	in	the	quiet	of	his	tent,	Humayun	offered	a	silent	prayer	of	thanks.	He	had	eliminated
one	of	the	three	other	major	contenders	for	the	throne	of	Hindustan.	But	he	knew	he	must	not	relax.
He	 must	 retain	 the	 initiative	 and	 the	 impetus	 of	 his	 victories,	 pushing	 himself	 and	 his	 army	 to	 the
utmost.	Otherwise,	his	chance	to	recover	his	throne	and	to	transform	himself	from	failure	to	victor
might	be	lost	and	might	never	arise	again.
The	next	morning	Ahmed	Khan’s	scouts	brought	news	of	a	further	opportunity.	Travellers	coming
up	the	road	from	the	south	had	told	them	that	a	small	army	led	by	two	of	Tartar	Khan’s	generals	was
about	 five	 days’	 ride	 away,	 heading	 north	 in	 their	 direction.	 Its	 apparent	 aim	 was	 to	 confront	 Adil

Shah	 of	 whose	 defeat	 they	 were	 as	 yet	 ignorant.	 Realising	 that	 he	 had	 a	 great	 chance	 to	 inflict	 a
serious	 blow	 on	 the	 second	 of	 the	 contenders	 for	 the	 throne	 of	 Hindustan	 and	 in	 all	 probability
remove	 him	 too	 from	 contention,	 Humayun	 immediately	 ordered	 his	 men	 to	 move	 south	 to	 attack
Tartar	Khan’s	army.
A	week	later,	Humayun	surveyed	another	battlefield.	Riding	hard,	his	troops	had	come	up	with	their
enemy	 earlier	 that	 day	 and	 had	 found	 that	 their	 opponents	 were	 travelling	 in	 two	 distinct	 divisions
separated	 by	 at	 least	 a	 mile.	 Neither	 group	 numbered	 more	 than	 four	 thousand	 men.	 Humayun	 had
straightaway	 ordered	 an	 attack	 on	 the	 leading	 division,	 which	 had	 quickly	 broken	 under	 the	 impact
and	 scattered	 across	 the	 plain.	 Rather	 than	 riding	 to	 the	 aid	 of	 their	 stricken	 comrades,	 the	 second
division	 had	 retreated	 and	 occupied	 a	 defensive	 position	 on	 a	 nearby	 small	 hill,	 which	 Humayun’s
troops	had	swiftly	encircled.
At	 this	 moment,	 Humayun	 could	 see	 a	 group	 of	 officers	 conferring	 on	 the	 hilltop.	 Turning	 to
Ahmed	Khan	at	his	side,	he	asked,	‘Do	we	know	who	the	general	of	that	division	is?’
‘Majesty,	 during	 the	 recent	 battle	 the	 commander	 of	 a	 squadron	 of	 cavalry	 surrendered	 almost
immediately	 and	 told	 us	 that	 he	 and	 his	 men	 wished	 to	 serve	 you.	 We	 put	 his	 men	 under	 guard	 and
confined	him	to	one	of	our	tents	where	he	volunteered	much	information	about	the	make-up	of	our
enemy’s	army	and	its	morale.	He	is	sure	to	know.’
‘Bring	him	to	me.’
A	few	minutes	later,	two	of	Ahmed	Khan’s	men	appeared	leading	a	tall	man	of	about	thirty	with	a
neatly	trimmed	black	beard.	To	forestall	any	possibility	of	his	attacking	Humayun	they	had	shackled
his	 ankles	 so	 closely	 that	 he	 could	 only	 shuffle	 forwards.	 When	 he	 was	 within	 a	 few	 yards	 of
Humayun	he	threw	himself	on	the	ground.
After	a	moment	Humayun	spoke.	‘Help	him	up.’	Then	he	asked,	‘Who	are	you?’
‘Mustapha	Ergun,	a	Turkish	officer	in	the	service	of	Tartar	Khan.’
‘I	understand	you	wish	to	transfer	your	allegiance	to	me.’
‘My	hundred	men	also.’
‘Why?’
‘We	joined	Tartar	Khan	in	search	of	booty	and	of	position	if	he	became	Padishah	of	Hindustan.	But
we	 have	 found	 he	 is	 not	 serious	 about	 pursuing	 this	 ambition.	 While	 he	 loitered	 on	 the	 borders	 of
Gujarat	in	the	arms	of	his	concubines,	he	despatched	us	on	this	tentative	expedition	against	the	weaker
of	 his	 fellow	 contenders,	 Adil	 Shah.	 He	 didn’t	 even	 provide	 us	 with	 enough	 men,	 weapons	 or
equipment	 to	 do	 our	 job	 properly	 and	 our	 pay	 is	 three	 months	 in	 arrears.	 We	 believe	 that	 you	 are
serious	in	your	ambition	to	regain	the	imperial	throne	and	that	when	you	succeed	you	will	reward	us
generously.’
‘I	remember	well	the	esteem	in	which	my	father	held	his	Turkish	gunners.	I	too	have	been	served
well	 by	 officers	 from	 other	 nations.	 Bairam	 Khan	 here	 joined	 me	 from	 the	 army	 of	 the	 Shah	 of
Persia.	But	how	can	I	be	sure	of	your	sincerity?’
‘We	are	prepared	to	swear	our	loyalty	to	you	on	the	Holy	Book	–	or	let	us	lead	the	attack	in	your
next	battle	to	prove	ourselves.’
‘I	will	consider	both	offers,	but	I	pose	you	this	initial	test.	Go	to	the	other	division	of	your	army
who	sit	surrounded	on	that	hill.	Persuade	them	to	surrender.	I	extend	to	them	the	following	terms	–
either	 to	 depart	 unmolested	 retaining	 their	 personal	 weapons	 but	 leaving	 behind	 their	 heavy
equipment	or	–	like	you	–	to	volunteer	to	join	my	forces.	If	they	do	not	surrender,	I	may	take	up	your
offer	to	lead	the	next	attack,	which	will	be	on	them.	Do	you	accept	my	proposition?’
‘Yes,	Majesty.’

‘Strike	off	his	shackles.’
A	quarter	of	an	hour	later,	Mustapha	Ergun	rode	out	from	Humayun’s	camp	accompanied	by	ten	of
his	men.	When	he	reached	the	hill	on	which	his	comrades	were	drawn	up,	they	opened	a	gap	in	their
lines	to	receive	him.	Humayun	could	see	him	and	his	men	ride	to	the	top	of	the	barren	hill	to	talk	to
the	officers	congregated	there.	Soon	the	knot	of	men	broke	up	and	individual	officers	seemed	to	be
consulting	 their	 men.There	 were	 occasional	 outbursts	 of	 cheering	 before	 the	 gap	 in	 the	 front	 line
reopened	and	Mustapha	Ergun	with	his	ten	soldiers	behind	him	re-emerged	and	rode	back	down	to
Humayun’s	position.
Two	of	Humayun’s	bodyguards	placed	themselves	on	either	side	of	him	as,	smiling,	he	approached
Humayun,	who	had	Bairam	Khan	and	Akbar	at	his	side.	‘What	success	have	you	had?’
‘No	 more	 blood	 will	 be	 spilled,	 Majesty.	 The	 division	 on	 the	 hill	 is	 commanded	 by	 a	 Gujarati
prince	named	Selim	and	two-thirds	of	his	troops	are	Gujaratis	enlisted	by	Tartar	Khan	when	he	first
decided	to	pursue	the	imperial	throne.	They’re	tired	of	this	campaign	and	wish	to	return	home	and	are
prepared	to	accept	your	conditions	for	doing	so.’
‘Good.	And	the	other	third?’
‘A	 mixed	 bunch	 from	 many	 places.	 Some	 are	 mere	 boys	 who	 joined	 our	 ranks	 as	 we	 passed
through	 their	 villages	 from	 a	 desire	 for	 adventure,	 most	 of	 whom	 now	 want	 nothing	 more	 than	 to
preserve	 their	 lives.	 Others	 are	 hardened	 soldiers	 of	 fortune	 like	 ourselves,	 including	 one	 hundred
musketeers	from	my	own	country	under	the	command	of	an	old	comrade	of	mine,	Kemil	Attak,	and
about	 the	 same	 number	 of	 Persians,	 recruited	 to	 man	 the	 few	 small	 cannon	 we	 have	 with	 us.	 Both
these	two	groups	wish	to	join	you	with	their	weapons,	as	we	do	ourselves.’
‘You	have	done	well.	I	accept	your	offer	of	service	and	that	of	your	men	and	I	will	accept	those	of
the	other	volunteers,	provided	like	you	their	officers	convince	me	of	their	sincerity.’	Then,	turning	to
Bairam	Khan,	he	said,	‘Each	victory	brings	us	nearer	to	our	goal.	But	we	cannot	falter	or	all	we	have
achieved	so	far	will	be	lost.	This	evening	we	will	feast	to	celebrate	our	victory	and	to	welcome	our
new	 comrades-in-arms	 but	 tomorrow	 we	 will	 march	 to	 vanquish	 the	 last	 of	 the	 pretenders	 to	 my
throne,	 Sekunder	 Shah.	 He	 is	 the	 best	 leader	 and	 his	 army	 is	 the	 largest	 of	 the	 three.	 His	 governor
occupies	Delhi	and	he	himself	sits	with	his	army	across	the	road	to	the	capital.	Our	greatest	battle	is	to
come.’
Later	 that	 night,	 as	 the	 sounds	 of	 merriment	 and	 raucous	 singing	 echoed	 around	 the	 camp,
Humayun	left	the	celebrations.	For	a	moment	he	stopped	and	gazed	at	the	stars	sprinkling	the	black
velvet	 of	 the	 night	 but	 then	 he	 walked	 slowly	 back	 to	 his	 tent.	 A	 waiting	 guard	 lifted	 the	 flap	 and
Humayun	entered	and	sat	at	a	low	table.	Taking	a	pen	he	dipped	it	into	the	jade	inkpot	and	by	the	light
of	 a	 flickering	 oil	 lamp	 started	 to	 write	 a	 letter	 to	 Hamida	 to	 be	 handed	 to	 a	 post	 messenger	 in	 the
morning	to	begin	its	long	journey	back	to	Kabul.	He	wrote	that	he	and	Akbar	were	safe,	of	his	love
for	her	and	of	his	certainty	that	he	would	soon	sit	once	more	on	the	throne	of	Hindustan.

The	air	was	hot	and	still	and	as	Humayun	looked	across	from	his	vantage	point	on	a	low	sandstone
hill	he	saw	that	dark	clouds	were	piling	up	on	the	far	horizon	as	they	always	did	in	the	afternoon	in
early	 summer	 as	 the	 monsoon	 approached.	 It	 was	 nearly	 a	 month	 since	 his	 defeat	 of	 Tartar	 Khan’s
generals.	In	that	time	he	had	turned	east	in	pursuit	of	the	forces	of	Sekunder	Shah	who,	according	to

his	scouts,	had	a	quarter	of	a	million	men	in	his	main	army	–	a	number	which	considerably	exceeded
Humayun’s	forces	even	though	they	had	now	grown	to	over	a	hundred	thousand.
Humayun	 had	 quickly	 realised	 that	 to	 be	 certain	 of	 victory	 he	 needed	 to	 erode	 his	 enemies’
numerical	advantage	before	taking	them	on	in	the	open	field.	Therefore,	a	fortnight	previously	he	had
despatched	a	raiding	force	under	Bairam	Khan	to	ride	hard	and	light	to	harass	his	enemies’	outposts
and	 to	 disrupt	 their	 communications	 with	 Delhi.	 Now	 he	 could	 see	 Bairam	 Khan’s	 troops	 returning
across	 the	 dry	 plains.	 Messengers	 had	 already	 reported	 that	 they	 had	 had	 some	 successes,	 but	 he
needed	to	hear	from	Bairam	Khan’s	lips	their	extent	and	what	more	he	and	his	men	had	learned	about
their	enemies’	strength	and	future	plans.
Too	eager	for	news	to	wait	for	Bairam	Khan	to	come	to	him,	Humayun	called	his	bodyguard	to
him	and,	kicking	his	black	horse	into	a	gallop,	set	off	down	the	hill	towards	Bairam	Khan’s	column.
An	hour	later,	beneath	the	limited	shade	provided	by	a	solitary	tree,	he	and	Bairam	Khan	were	sitting
on	a	red	and	blue	carpet	spread	with	cushions.
‘Our	successes	in	our	raids	were	hard	won,	Majesty.	Unlike	our	other	opponents,	Sekunder	Shah’s
men	are	disciplined.	Even	when	surprised	and	outnumbered	they	did	not	panic	or	flee	but	closed	ranks
and	battled	hard,	sometimes	inflicting	heavy	casualties	on	us	before	we	finally	prevailed.’
‘As	 we	 feared,	 they	 make	 powerful	 opponents.	 What	 did	 you	 learn	 of	 Sekunder	 Shah’s
movements?’
‘He	is	concentrating	his	main	forces	in	the	vicinity	of	a	town	called	Sirhind	on	the	south	bank	of
one	of	the	branches	of	the	Sutlej	river	before	making	his	next	move.	According	to	a	despatch	some	of
our	men	found	on	one	of	a	party	of	Sekunder	Shah’s	messengers	they	captured	three	days	ago,	he	has
called	for	further	reinforcements	from	Delhi	and	is	expecting	a	large	detachment	of	them	to	arrive
within	 the	 next	 ten	 days	 bringing	 with	 them	 extra	 money	 to	 pay	 his	 other	 troops	 as	 well	 as	 more
equipment.’
‘You	are	sure	the	message	was	genuine?’
‘It	has	Sekunder	Shah’s	seal	on	it,	look	.	.	.	’
Bairam	Khan	unfastened	the	worn	brown	leather	satchel	he	had	looped	across	his	chest,	took	out	a
large	folded	sheet	of	paper	with	a	red	wax	seal	on	it	and	held	it	out	to	Humayun.
‘It	certainly	looks	the	real	thing,	but	could	it	have	been	planted	as	some	kind	of	ruse?’
‘I	 don’t	 think	 so,	 Majesty.	 The	 group	 of	 our	 men	 who	 captured	 the	 messengers	 were	 a	 scouting
party	operating	well	away	–	perhaps	forty	miles	further	east	from	my	main	force.	They	said	that	the
messengers	were	galloping	hard	when	they	came	upon	them	rather	than	loitering	as	they	might	have
been	if	looking	to	be	taken.	When	I	spoke	to	them,	Sekunder	Shah’s	men	gave	a	good	impression	of
being	 surprised	 and	 humbled	 to	 be	 captured.	 If	 they	 were	 acting,	 they	 were	 playing	 their	 parts	 to
perfection.’
‘In	 that	 case,	 let	 us	 strain	 every	 sinew	 to	 intercept	 the	 reinforcements	 and	 seize	 the	 money	 and
weapons.	Send	scouts	out	immediately	to	cover	all	possible	approach	routes.’

‘Majesty,	 their	 pickets	 have	 warned	 them	 of	 our	 presence,’	 a	 slightly	 breathless	 Ahmed	 Khan	 told
Humayun.	 ‘They	 have	 halted	 and	 drawn	 themselves	 into	 a	 defensive	 position	 about	 two	 miles	 away
over	 the	 crest	 of	 that	 ridge,	 in	 and	 around	 a	 small	 village	 whose	 inhabitants	 fled	 at	 their	 approach.

They	are	positioning	their	men	behind	the	village’s	mud	walls	and	are	overturning	their	wagons	to
form	extra	barricades.’
‘How	many	of	them	are	there?’
‘About	five	thousand,	mostly	horsemen	including	some	with	muskets,	protecting	a	large	baggage
train.	They’ve	also	got	quite	a	few	small	cannon	with	them.’
‘Now	we’ve	lost	any	chance	of	surprising	them,	our	best	hope	is	to	attack	before	they	can	complete
their	preparations.	Have	Bairam	Khan	ready	our	men.’
Ninety	minutes	later,	Humayun	stood	on	the	top	of	the	ridge	above	the	village	and	watched	as	the
first	 wave	 of	 his	 men	 led	 by	 Bairam	 Khan	 himself	 charged	 the	 barricades	 behind	 which	 Sekunder
Shah’s	 men	 were	 drawn	 up.	 There	 was	 a	 loud	 crash	 as	 Sekunder	 Shah’s	 cannon	 fired.	 Several	 of
Bairam	 Khan’s	 men	 fell.	 A	 crackle	 of	 musketry	 followed	 which	 emptied	 more	 saddles.	 More	 fell
from	a	second	wave	of	cannon	fire	before	they	could	reach	the	barricades,	but	still	Bairam	Khan’s
men	rode	on.
‘Look,	Father,	isn’t	that	Mustapha	Ergun	at	the	head	of	the	line	over	there?’	shouted	Akbar.
Humayun	 followed	 his	 son’s	 pointing	 hand	 and	 saw	 through	 the	 white	 smoke	 drifting	 across	 the
village	his	new	recruit	leaping	one	of	the	mud	walls	on	his	bay	horse,	followed	closely	by	some	of
his	 men.	 Elsewhere,	 Humayun	 could	 see	 that	 a	 number	 of	 his	 other	 cavalry	 had	 come	 under	 such
heavy	fire	and	taken	so	many	casualties	that	they	were	retreating,	leaving	bodies	of	men	and	horses
strewn	in	front	of	the	makeshift	fortifications	thrown	up	by	Sekunder	Shah’s	men.
Then	Humayun	saw	Bairam	Khan	gesturing	to	a	detachment	of	his	men	previously	held	in	reserve.
They	galloped	to	the	area	of	the	barricades	where	Mustapha	Ergun	and	his	troops	had	made	a	breach
and	swiftly	followed	them	into	the	enemy	camp.	Once	inside,	they	began	attacking	their	opponents’
positions	from	the	rear.	For	several	minutes	the	horsemen,	locked	in	combat,	swayed	back	and	forth,
but	slowly	Humayun’s	men	were	beginning	to	seize	the	upper	hand	as	more	and	more	reinforcements
poured	 over	 the	 barricades	 despite	 suffering	 continuing	 casualties	 from	 Sekunder	 Shah’s	 resolute
musketeers.	 Inch	 by	 inch	 the	 defenders	 were	 being	 herded	 into	 a	 small	 portion	 of	 their	 original
position.	Suddenly	a	group	of	Sekunder	Shah’s	horsemen	broke	out	from	the	mass	of	their	closely
packed	 comrades	 and	 fought	 their	 way	 to	 a	 gap	 in	 the	 barricades	 before	 beginning	 to	 gallop
determinedly	in	the	direction	in	which	Sekunder	Shah’s	main	army	lay.
‘We	must	stop	them,’	shouted	Humayun.	‘Follow	me!’
Head	bent	low	over	his	horse’s	neck	and	with	Akbar	at	his	side,	Humayun	galloped	after	the	riders.
Led	by	a	thick-set	officer	wearing	a	steel	breastplate,	they	were	maintaining	cohesion	and	formation,
seemingly	 bent	 on	 alerting	 Sekunder	 Shah	 as	 soon	 as	 possible	 to	 the	 fate	 of	 their	 comrades	 rather
than	on	simply	preserving	their	lives.
Slowly	Humayun	and	his	men	gained	on	the	group.When	they	were	within	arrow	shot,	Humayun
grabbed	his	bow	and	quiver	from	his	back.	Standing	in	his	stirrups	with	his	reins	clenched	in	his	teeth
he	fired	at	the	officer.	He	missed	by	inches,	his	arrow	embedding	itself	in	the	man’s	saddle.	However,
before	he	could	fit	another	arrow	to	his	string,	the	officer	slid	from	his	horse,	an	arrow	in	his	neck.
His	foot	caught	in	his	stirrup	and	he	was	dragged	for	a	while	–	head	bumping	along	the	stony	ground
–	behind	his	frightened,	galloping	mount	before	the	stirrup	broke.	Then	he	rolled	over	twice	and	lay
still.	Humayun	realised	it	was	Akbar	who	had	fired	the	fatal	arrow.	Others	of	Sekunder	Shah’s	men
had	also	fallen	from	their	horses.
‘Well	done!’	Humayun	shouted	to	his	son,	‘but	stay	back	now.’
Humayun	 kicked	 his	 horse	 into	 a	 gallop	 once	 more	 and	 headed	 after	 the	 remaining	 dozen	 or	 so
riders.	 Soon	 he	 was	 up	 with	 the	 hindmost	 of	 them,	 who	 was	 desperately	 urging	 his	 sweat-soaked,

blowing	 pony	 onwards.	 Seeing	 Humayun	 he	 half	 raised	 his	 round	 shield	 but	 he	 was	 too	 late.
Humayun’s	sharp	sword	caught	him	across	the	back	of	his	neck	beneath	his	helmet.	His	blood	gushed
crimson	and	he	crashed	to	the	hard	ground.
Humayun	 did	 not	 look	 back	 but	 galloped	 after	 the	 only	 one	 of	 the	 riders	 who	 had	 not	 been
overtaken	and	engaged	by	one	of	his	men	and	was	still	in	the	saddle	riding	hard.	He	was	a	fine,	fluid
rider	mounted	on	a	speedy	black	horse	whose	hooves	kicked	up	pebbles	as	they	pounded	the	ground.
It	was	all	Humayun	could	do	to	gain	on	him	even	though	his	horse	was	fresher.	Finally	Humayun	and
three	of	his	bodyguard	drew	alongside	the	rider,	who	aimed	a	stroke	with	his	scimitar	at	one	of	the
bodyguards.	The	man	managed	to	get	his	arm	up	to	protect	his	head	but	received	a	deep	wound	to	his
forearm	 and	 fell	 back	 from	 the	 fight.	 However,	 in	 striking	 at	 the	 bodyguard	 the	 horseman	 exposed
himself	 to	 a	 thrust	 from	 Humayun	 which	 penetrated	 his	 thigh	 and	 he	 too	 fell,	 leaving	 his	 horse	 to
gallop	off	alone.
Reining	in	his	own	horse	and	turning	in	his	saddle,	Humayun	saw	that	all	the	break-out	party	were
accounted	for,	and	most	important	of	all	Akbar	was	safe.	As	they	rode	back	towards	the	main	battle
around	the	village,	Humayun	could	see	that	in	most	places	the	combat	was	over.	There	was	still	some
fighting	 going	 on	 around	 a	 group	 of	 mud	 huts.	 The	 thatched	 roof	 of	 one	 was	 burning,	 perhaps	 set
ablaze	by	a	spark	from	a	musket	or	cannon	or	perhaps	ignited	deliberately	by	his	men	to	flush	out
their	 opponents.	 However,	 as	 he	 came	 closer	 Humayun	 saw	 that	 this	 fight	 too	 had	 ceased	 and	 the
remaining	defenders	had	thrown	down	their	arms.
Four	hours	later,	dark,	almost	purple	clouds	were	filling	the	sky	and	a	hot	breeze	had	sprung	up	–
the	monsoon	would	start	any	day	soon,	thought	Humayun,	perhaps	even	this	very	afternoon.	Turning
to	Akbar,	who	was	standing	by	his	side	beneath	the	awning	of	his	scarlet	command	tent,	he	put	his	arm
round	 his	 son’s	 shoulders.	 ‘I’ve	 always	 prided	 myself	 on	 my	 skill	 as	 an	 archer,	 but	 your	 shot	 that
brought	down	the	officer	was	exceptional.’
‘Thank	you,	but	it	was	probably	a	fluke.’
‘I	think	not	–	I’ve	seen	you	practise	.	.	.	’	Humayun	paused	and	squeezed	his	son’s	shoulder.	‘Good
shot	 as	 it	 was	 and	 glad	 as	 I	 was	 that	 you	 made	 it,	 I	 should	 have	 ordered	 you	 not	 to	 accompany	 me
when	I	chased	after	those	riders.	Lucky	arrow	shots	might	have	killed	us	both,	destroying	my	hopes
for	 our	 family’s	 destiny	 as	 well	 as	 causing	 your	 mother	 immense	 grief.	 In	 future	 we	 must	 remain
separated	on	the	battlefield,	and	I	am	afraid	you	must	stay	in	the	rear.’
‘But	 Father	 .	 .	 .	 ’	 Akbar	 began,	 then	 let	 his	 words	 trail	 away	 as	 he	 saw	 the	 determination	 in	 his
father ’s	eyes	and	realised	the	logic	in	his	words.
‘Enough	of	this.	Here	come	our	officers,	led	by	Bairam	Khan,	to	discuss	our	next	move.’	Humayun
turned	 back	 into	 the	 tent	 where	 cushions	 had	 been	 placed	 in	 a	 semicircle	 round	 his	 throne	 for	 his
commanders	and	a	gilded	stool	had	been	set	up	for	Akbar	immediately	to	the	right	of	his	place.	Once
they	were	all	assembled,	Humayun	asked,‘What	were	our	casualties?’
‘Two	hundred	men	killed,	at	least,	and	over	six	hundred	injured,	many	badly,	including	several	of
Mustapha	Ergun’s	Turks	who	first	got	behind	the	barricades.’
‘Mustapha	Ergun	and	his	men	did	well.	When	we	divide	the	booty	we	must	double	their	share,	but
before	we	can	allocate	rewards	we	must	know	the	extent	of	our	capture.’
‘Two	large	chests	of	gold	coin,’	said	Bairam	Khan,	‘and	five	of	silver	designed	to	pay	Sekunder
Shah’s	troops.	Their	loss	will	disappoint	his	men	and	may	affect	their	commitment	to	his	cause.’
‘We	can	only	hope	it	does.	What	military	equipment	did	we	acquire?’
‘Two	bullock	carts	loaded	with	wooden	cases	of	new	muskets	and	their	powder	and	bullets.	Two
new	medium-sized	bronze	cannon	and	ten	smaller	ones.	Sekunder	Shah’s	men	managed	to	destroy	six

more	by	exploding	excess	powder	in	their	barrels.	There	are	also	boxes	of	swords	and	battleaxes	as
well	 as	 three	 thousand	 five	 hundred	 horses	 and	 some	 oxen	 and	 other	 pack	 animals.	 All	 in	 all,	 a
welcome	 and	 substantial	 contribution	 to	 our	 supplies	 and	 an	 equally	 substantial	 loss	 for	 Sekunder
Shah.’
‘How	many	of	his	men	did	we	capture?’
‘About	four	thousand.	The	rest	were	killed.	What	should	we	do	with	the	prisoners,	Majesty?’
‘Hold	them	for	forty-eight	hours	then	allow	any	who	are	prepared	to	swear	on	the	Holy	Book	that
they	will	fight	no	more	to	depart	south	on	foot	without	their	weapons.	Now	let	us	turn	to	planning	our
final	victory	over	Sekunder	Shah.	What	do	you	think	our	next	move	should	be,	Zahid	Beg?’
‘The	monsoon	is	imminent.	We	cannot	campaign	satisfactorily	during	it	–	our	baggage	trains	and
artillery	 will	 scarcely	 be	 able	 to	 move.	 We	 should	 encamp	 while	 sending	 scouts	 south	 to	 keep	 the
main	routes	between	Sekunder	Shah	and	Delhi	under	observation,	and	then	when	the	monsoon	ceases
..	.’
‘No,’	 Humayun	 interrupted,	 ‘I	 will	 not	 let	 the	 monsoon	 stop	 us.	 That	 is	 what	 Sekunder	 Shah	 will
expect.	The	prize	of	the	throne	of	Hindustan	is	too	great.	It	has	been	lost	to	me	too	long.	Now	is	no
time	to	hold	back.	If	we	press	on	to	attack	him	at	once	we	will	have	the	advantage	of	surprise.	Too
often	in	the	past	I’ve	delayed	and	lost	the	initiative.	It	will	not	be	so	this	time.	Ahmed	Khan,	how	far
away	is	Sekunder	Shah’s	main	force?	How	many	days’	march	will	it	take	us	to	come	up	with	them?’
‘They	are	still	encamped	at	Sirhind	on	the	Sutlej,	about	a	hundred	miles	east	of	here,	perhaps	ten
days’	march	for	the	army	with	its	baggage.	Our	spies	report	they	seem	to	be	well	established	there
and	preparing	to	see	out	the	monsoon	in	comfort	before	making	their	next	move.’
‘Well,	they’re	in	for	a	shock.’

Chapter	26
Victory
Fat	drops	of	rain	were	splashing	from	a	leaden	sky	into	the	large	puddles	of	water	that	had	already
formed	outside	Humayun’s	scarlet	command	tent.	As	he	looked	out	from	beneath	its	dripping	awning
while	he	waited	for	his	commanders	to	join	him	for	a	council	of	war,	he	could	see	that	the	puddles
had	already	coalesced	to	form	pools	in	some	of	the	lower-lying	and	muddier	parts	of	his	camp.	The
water	rose	over	the	feet	of	his	soldiers	who,	heads	hunched	into	their	shoulders	against	the	downpour,
splashed	 their	 way	 to	 and	 from	 picket	 duty.	 In	 whatever	 direction	 he	 looked	 there	 was	 no	 sign	 of	 a
break	in	the	weather.
Humayun	turned	back	into	his	tent,	where	his	officers	were	now	assembled	in	a	semicircle,	some	of
them	 still	 shaking	 from	 their	 clothes	 the	 rain	 which	 had	 soaked	 them	 as	 they	 ran	 the	 short	 distance
from	their	own	tents	across	to	his.	Humayun	took	his	place	in	the	centre	with	the	young	Akbar	at	his
side.
‘Ahmed	Khan,	what	are	the	latest	reports	of	Sekunder	Shah’s	army?’
‘He	remains	six	miles	away	behind	his	fortified	positions	at	Sirhind,	just	as	he	did	for	the	fortnight
we	were	making	our	way	towards	him	before	we	set	up	camp	here.	We	know	from	the	number	of	his
scouts	 that	 we’ve	 encountered	 or	 captured	 that	 he	 has	 long	 been	 aware	 of	 our	 approach,	 yet	 he	 has
made	 no	 move	 to	 confront	 us.	 No	 doubt	 he	 still	 believes	 that	 we	 will	 not	 attack	 him	 during	 the
monsoon	for	fear	of	being	slowed	down	by	all	the	mud	and	made	into	easy	targets	for	his	well	dug-in
cannon	and	for	his	archers	and	musketeers.’
‘I	 have	 delayed	 our	 assault	 for	 this	 last	 week	 to	 encourage	 Sekunder	 Shah	 in	 that	 false	 belief,
attempting	to	convince	him	that	we	will	be	as	cautious	and	conventional	in	our	thinking	as	he	is	and
that	–	having	come	up	to	his	position	–	we	will	postpone	any	combat	until	the	rains	have	abated	and
the	ground	has	begun	to	dry.’
‘But	doesn’t	he	have	a	point,	Majesty?’	asked	Zahid	Beg,	a	deeply	concerned	expression	on	his	thin
face.	 ‘We	 cannot	 move	 our	 cannon	 at	 any	 speed	 and	 the	 powder	 for	 our	 muskets	 is	 always	 getting
damp.	There	have	been	several	accidents	when	our	men	have	rashly	brought	it	too	close	to	fires	in	an
attempt	to	dry	it	out.’
‘Of	 course	 we	 will	 face	 some	 problems	 when	 we	 attack,’	 said	 Humayun,	 ‘but	 these	 will	 be	 mere
inconveniences	compared	to	the	benefits	surprise	will	secure	us.’
Bairam	 Khan	 was	 nodding	 but	 some	 others	 still	 looked	 doubtful.	 Suddenly,	 Akbar,	 who	 usually
listened	 attentively	 but	 rarely	 spoke,	 rose	 from	 the	 place	 where	 he	 had	 been	 sitting	 and	 said	 in	 a
steady,	firm	voice,	‘I	believe	you	are	right,	Father.	Now	is	the	time	to	seize	our	destiny	and	surprise
Sekunder	Shah	before	he	succeeds	in	raising	more	troops.	He	has	a	far	greater	reservoir	to	draw	on
than	we.’
‘Well	spoken,	Akbar,’	Humayun	said.	‘I	will	have	Ahmed	Khan	send	scouts	to	test	out	the	firmest
approach	 route	 to	 Sekunder	 Shah’s	 camp.	 It	 would	 seem	 to	 lie	 over	 that	 slightly	 higher	 ground
northeast	of	here.	If	we	go	in	that	direction	we	may	have	to	ride	a	mile	or	so	further	but	it	will	be

worth	 it.	 We	 will	 not	 attempt	 to	 move	 our	 cannon	 forward	 but	 will	 take	 some	 mounted	 musketeers.
Even	if	only	some	of	their	muskets	fire	because	of	the	damp	it	will	help.’
‘But	 if	 we	 follow	 that	 route	 we	 will	 be	 seen	 and	 it	 will	 give	 Sekunder	 Shah	 longer	 to	 prepare,’
interrupted	Nadim	Khwaja.
‘I’ve	thought	of	that.To	add	to	the	surprise	and	to	conceal	our	movements,	I	intend	to	attack	under
cover	 of	 darkness	 in	 the	 hour	 before	 dawn	 tomorrow.	 We	 will	 make	 our	 preparations	 as
inconspicuously	 as	 we	 can	 today	 and	 will	 rouse	 our	 troops	 at	 three	 in	 the	 morning	 to	 begin	 our
advance	 an	 hour	 later.	 We’ll	 move	 in	 separate	 divisions	 of	 five	 hundred	 men,	 each	 identified	 by	 a
brightly	coloured	cloth	tied	around	the	arm	to	reduce	the	chances	of	confusion	in	the	dark.’
‘Majesty,’	said	Bairam	Khan,	‘I	understand	your	plan.	I	believe	our	men	will	be	disciplined	enough
to	carry	it	out,	trusting	as	they	do	in	their	leaders.’
‘I	intend	to	go	amongst	the	troops	towards	dusk	with	Akbar	to	encourage	our	soldiers	and	tell	them
of	our	plan	and	of	my	faith	in	it	–	and	in	them	–	to	see	it	through.’
The	rain	had	slackened	a	little	during	the	day	but	more	dark	clouds	were	gathering	on	the	horizon
as,	 with	 Akbar,	 Ahmed	 Khan	 and	 Bairam	 Khan	 at	 his	 side,	 Humayun	 rode	 up	 to	 the	 cluster	 of	 tents
occupied	by	some	of	Bairam	Khan’s	cavalry	–	mostly	men	from	Badakhshan.	Humayun	had	decided
to	keep	his	address	to	this	group	to	the	last.	He	dismounted	from	his	tall	black	horse	and,	as	the	men
gathered	around,	began.
‘Your	 fathers	 served	 my	 father	 well	 as	 he	 won	 an	 empire.	 You	 have	 served	 me	 well	 in	 this
campaign	to	win	back	the	lands	clawed	away	by	greedy	usurpers.	Tomorrow	you	will	join	me	in	the
vanguard.	Together	we	will	face	our	greatest	battle	so	far.	When	we	conquer,	as	I	know	we	will,	we
will	regain	Hindustan	and	secure	its	rich	lands	for	our	sons.’
Humayun	 paused	 to	 put	 his	 arm	 around	 Akbar ’s	 shoulders	 before	 continuing.	 ‘I	 know	 that	 your
sons	–	like	young	Akbar	here	–	will	be	worthy	of	the	legacy	we	will	win	for	them.	Remember	that
tomorrow	 we	 fight	 for	 their	 future	 as	 well	 as	 our	 own.	 Let	 us	 seize	 our	 destiny.	 Let	 us	 show	 such
valour	 and	 gain	 such	 a	 victory	 that	 our	 grandsons	 and	 their	 children	 will	 still	 talk	 with	 awe	 and
gratitude	of	our	deeds,	just	as	we	recall	the	fabled	feats	of	Timur	and	his	men.’
As	Humayun	finished	a	burst	of	cheering	rose	from	the	Badakhshanis.	His	words	had	hit	home,	just
as	they	had	with	all	the	other	men	he	had	spoken	to	on	his	tour	of	the	camp.

Jauhar	 quietly	 entered	 Humayun’s	 tent	 at	 two	 in	 the	 morning	 to	 rouse	 him	 but	 found	 that	 Humayun
was	already	awake.	He	had	been	for	some	time.While	listening	to	the	rain	falling	steadily	on	his	tent
he’d	searched	his	mind,	rehearsing	his	battle	plan	over	and	over	again	to	check	he	had	overlooked
nothing.	Eventually	he	had	convinced	himself	that	he	had	not.
Then	 his	 thoughts	 had	 turned	 involuntarily	 to	 the	 course	 of	 his	 life	 since	 he	 had	 first	 left	 Agra
seventeen	years	ago	to	confront	Sher	Shah.	At	that	time	–	he	now	realised	–	he	had	been	immature,
too	ready	to	believe	that	success	would	be	his	by	right	and	consequently	not	sufficiently	motivated	to
apply	all	his	inner	resources	to	achieving	it.	However,	he	had	never	lost	his	belief	in	himself	and	in
his	destiny,	never	conceded	that	a	setback,	however	severe,	might	be	a	final	defeat.	He	was	immensely
grateful	that	he	had	been	granted	a	second	chance	and	for	that	he	knew	he	had	deserved	his	birth	name
of	Humayun,	‘Fortunate’.	So	many	–	even	kings	–	only	received	a	single	opportunity	and,	if	they	did

not	grasp	it,	disappeared	from	history	as	if	they	had	never	lived,	all	their	promise,	all	their	hopes	and
ambitions	 evaporating	 into	 eternal	 obscurity.	 He	 had	 learned	 over	 his	 reign	 that	 a	 consistently
indomitable	spirit	was	as	essential	to	a	ruler	as	bravery	in	battle.	Today,	however,	was	to	be	a	day	of
battle	and	he	knew	he	must	put	his	courage	to	the	test	once	more.
With	that	thought,	he	had	begun	to	prepare	himself	for	combat,	a	task	in	which	Jauhar	now	started
to	assist	him,	helping	him	draw	on	his	long	yellow	leather	riding	boots	and	–	as	he	had	done	since
they	 were	 both	 young	 men	 –	 strapping	 on	 Humayun’s	 jewel-studded,	 engraved	 steel	 breastplate.	 As
Jauhar	 finally	 handed	 him	 his	 father ’s	 great	 sword	 Alamgir,	 Humayun	 smiled	 at	 him	 and	 touching
him	on	the	arm	said,	‘Thank	you	for	your	loyal	service	during	all	my	troubles.	Soon	we	will	be	back
in	our	fine	quarters	at	Agra.’
‘Majesty,	I	have	no	doubt	of	that,’	said	Jauhar	as	he	held	open	the	tent	flaps	for	Humayun	to	step	out
into	the	wet	night	air.
Akbar	was	waiting	outside	for	his	father	and	they	embraced.	Then	Akbar	asked,	‘May	I	not	join	the
attack?	I	envy	my	milk-brother	Adham	Khan	who	will	ride	in	the	vanguard.	He	will	be	able	to	boast	of
his	part	in	the	fight	when	we	again	meet	our	tutors	while	I	.	.	.	’
‘No,	you	are	the	future	of	our	dynasty,’	Humayun	interrupted.‘If,	God	forbid,	Adham	Khan	were	to
fall,	Maham	Anga	would	weep	but	his	loss	would	be	a	personal	one	to	his	family.	If	you	and	I	fell
together	our	line	would	be	extinguished.	I	cannot	risk	that	happening	so	you	must	remain	behind.’
Humayun	 realised	 that	 Akbar	 had	 asked	 more	 in	 hope	 than	 expectation	 and	 could	 not	 but	 admire
him	 for	 doing	 so.	 As	 he	 moved	 away	 from	 Akbar	 towards	 the	 place	 beneath	 the	 neem	 tree	 where
Bairam	 Khan	 and	 his	 other	 commanders	 were	 waiting,	 he	 saw	 by	 the	 ghostly	 light	 of	 one	 of	 the
frequent	flashes	of	sheet	lightning	that	a	few	yards	away	Bairam	Khan’s	young	qorchi	–	his	squire	–
was	bent	over	being	sick	as	he	held	on	to	the	reins	of	his	own	horse	and	that	of	his	master.	Humayun
turned	 and	 walked	 over	 to	 him.	 Seeing	 him	 approach,	 the	 young	 man	 quickly	 straightened	 up	 and
wiped	his	mouth	with	a	cloth.
‘Are	you	nervous	.	.	.	or	perhaps	a	little	frightened?’	Humayun	asked.
‘A	bit,	Majesty,’	the	youth,	whose	smooth	face	showed	that	he	was	no	older	than	Akbar,	admitted.
‘It’s	 normal,’	 said	 Humayun.	 ‘But	 remember	 something	 my	 father	 told	 me	 before	 the	 battle	 of
Panipat.	True	courage	is	to	feel	fear	but	still	to	mount	your	horse	and	head	into	battle.’
‘Yes,	Majesty.	I	will	not	let	you	or	Bairam	Khan	down.’
‘I	know	you	will	not.’
The	 weather	 had	 deteriorated	 dramatically	 by	 the	 time	 –	 an	 hour	 later	 –	 Humayun	 and	 the	 first
division	of	his	Badakhshani	cavalry	halted.They	had	reached	the	point	where	they	would	need	to	turn
from	 the	 relatively	 firm	 but	 circuitous	 northeastern	 approach	 track	 Ahmed	 Khan	 had	 successfully
identified	 to	 begin	 their	 final	 assault	 on	 Sekunder	 Shah’s	 camp.	 The	 rain	 was	 slanting	 down	 harder
and	 heavier	 than	 ever,	 reducing	 further	 what	 little	 visibility	 there	 was	 in	 the	 darkness.	 Even	 the
flickering	sheets	of	lightning	revealed	little	more	than	the	drenching	drops	of	rain	which	they	turned
silver	and	steel	before	the	peering	eyes	of	Humayun	and	his	men.	The	occasional	rumbles	of	distant
thunder	had	turned	into	an	almost	constant	crash	and	crack	overhead.	Even	the	elements	were	allying
themselves	to	him,	thought	Humayun	with	grim	satisfaction.	From	his	perspective,	the	change	in	the
weather	was	not	a	worsening	but	an	improvement.	There	was	little	prospect	that	Sekunder	Shah’s	men
would	see	or	hear	their	approach	before	they	were	almost	on	them.
Minutes	 earlier,	 Ahmed	 Khan	 had	 ridden	 up	 through	 the	 downpour.	 The	 rat	 tails	 of	 wet	 hair
protruding	from	beneath	his	helmet	were	now	flecked	with	grey	and	his	face	was	deeply	lined,	but	the
smile	that	lit	it	was	as	broad	and	as	vital	as	when	together	they	had	climbed	the	sheer	cliff	to	assault

the	Gujarati	fortress	of	Champnir.
‘Majesty,	we	have	captured	the	only	outpost	of	Sekunder	Shah’s	that	we	picked	out	in	daylight	as
protecting	this	approach	to	his	camp.	Thirty	of	my	men	crept	up	to	and	silently	climbed	a	section	of
its	 low	 mud	 wall	 which	 was	 crumbling	 away	 in	 the	 rains.	 Then	 they	 rushed	 the	 garrison,	 which
numbered	a	dozen	men,	and	quickly	and	quietly	slit	their	throats	or	strangled	them	with	thin	cords.
None	escaped	to	give	the	alarm	–	none	even	raised	a	cry.’
‘As	 usual	 you’ve	 done	 well,	 Ahmed	 Khan,’	 Humayun	 had	 said	 and	 Ahmed	 Khan	 had	 departed	 to
despatch	more	of	his	scouts	to	advance	stealthily	towards	Sekunder	Shah’s	camp.	Their	task	now	was
to	try	as	best	they	could	in	the	conditions	to	pick	out	the	worst	quagmires	between	Humayun’s	current
position	and	the	camp	which	lay	unseen	in	the	darkness	no	more	than	a	mile	away	so	that	Humayun’s
assault	troops	could	skirt	them,	avoiding	becoming	bogged	down.
Impatient	as	he	was	to	bring	on	the	battle	that	would	decide	his	destiny,	Humayun	knew	their	task
was	a	crucial	one	and	that	it	would	be	worth	the	wait	for	their	report.	In	any	case,	the	distances	were
small	and	they	should	soon	return.	After	what	seemed	to	Humayun	an	age	but	was,	in	fact,	no	more
than	 a	 quarter	 of	 an	 hour,	 Ahmed	 Khan	 reappeared	 with	 six	 of	 his	 scouts,	 all	 mud-spattered	 and
soaked	like	himself.	Ahmed	Khan	spoke.
‘The	mission	was	so	important	I	went	forward	myself	with	these	brave	men.	We	were	not	detected.
We	used	lances	to	probe	the	firmness	of	the	ground	and	the	depth	of	the	mud.	We	found	that	if	we	ride
directly	forward	we	will	indeed	come	upon	great	stretches	of	extremely	boggy	ground	which	would
impede	our	advance	and	might	even	cause	some	of	the	horses	to	become	completely	stuck.	However,
if	as	we	ride	we	take	a	rightward	arc	we	will	have	a	better	if	still	very	muddy	approach.	We	will	reach
the	earth	barricades	that	Sekunder	Shah	has	thrown	up	around	his	camp	at	their	northern	corner.	Here
they	stand	higher	than	a	man.	We	may	need	to	use	the	ladders	that	you	ordered	to	be	brought	with	us.’
‘Thank	you,	Ahmed	Khan.	Jauhar,	tell	Bairam	Khan	to	choose	some	pairs	of	soldiers	from	among
the	vanguard,	each	to	carry	slung	between	their	horses	one	of	the	ladders	we	have	brought	this	far	on
the	 backs	 of	 pack	 animals.	 Ask	 him	 to	 let	 me	 know	 once	 he	 is	 ready	 and	 I	 will	 join	 him	 in	 the
advance.’
Jauhar	 rode	 off	 and	 Humayun	 could	 just	 distinguish	 by	 the	 lightning	 flashes	 Bairam	 Khan’s
horsemen	forming	up	in	battle	order.	Now	combat	was	imminent,	Humayun	realised	that	he	felt	no
fear	but	a	general	heightening	of	his	senses	which	made	a	moment	last	a	minute	and	a	minute	an	hour
and	even	seemed	to	sharpen	his	vision,	enabling	him	to	see	Bairam	Khan	beckoning	him	through	the
murk	before	Jauhar	appeared	to	tell	him	he	was	ready.
Humayun	tugged	on	his	leather	gauntlets	and	instinctively	touched	his	father ’s	sword	Alamgir	in	its
jewelled	scabbard	at	his	side.	Then	he	repositioned	his	feet	in	his	stirrups	to	ensure	they	would	not
slip	and	finally	kicked	his	black	horse	into	motion	and	rode	over	to	where	Bairam	Khan	was	waiting
with	 Ahmed	 Khan.The	 latter	 would	 lead	 the	 advance	 with	 his	 six	 scouts	 who	 had	 made	 the
reconnaissance.	They	had	each	draped	white	linen	sheets	around	their	shoulders	to	make	themselves
easier	to	follow	in	the	gloom.
‘May	God	go	with	us,’	Humayun	said.	‘Lead	off,	Ahmed	Khan.’
Ahmed	Khan	simply	nodded	and	rode	forward.	He	was	quickly	followed	by	the	other	six	scouts	and
then	by	Bairam	Khan	and	his	young	qorchi,	now	looking	fully	composed	with	a	stern,	concentrated
expression	 on	 his	 young	 face.	 Humayun	 turned	 his	 horse	 and	 headed	 with	 them	 into	 the	 murk	 and
falling	rain	towards	Sekunder	Shah’s	camp.
The	conditions	meant	that	they	could	not	advance	at	much	more	than	a	canter.	Even	then,	the	horses’
hooves	 threw	 up	 large	 amounts	 of	 mud	 and	 water	 which	 splattered	 those	 following.	 After	 they	 had

ridden	for	no	more	than	two	or	three	minutes,	Ahmed	Khan	reined	in	his	horse	by	a	small	cluster	of
boulders	on	a	low	rise	and	Humayun	rode	up	to	him.
‘Majesty,’	 Ahmed	 Khan	 spoke	 softly,	 ‘these	 rocks	 are	 the	 last	 important	 marker.	 From	 here,	 the
walls	of	Sekunder	Shah’s	camp	are	about	six	hundred	yards	directly	in	front	of	us.’
‘Summon	up	the	pairs	of	men	with	ladders.’
As	they	rode	up,	the	rough	ladders	slung	between	their	horses	by	leather	thongs,	the	rain	slackened
and	 almost	 as	 if	 by	 a	 miracle	 the	 moon	 appeared,	 pale	 and	 watery,	 through	 a	 gap	 in	 the	 scudding
clouds.	 In	 the	 few	 moments	 before	 it	 disappeared	 again,	 Humayun	 glimpsed	 the	 walls	 of	 Sekunder
Shah’s	camp.They	were	as	Ahmed	Khan	had	described,	about	eight	feet	high	and	made	of	earth,	some
of	which	appeared	to	have	slipped	down	in	places,	making	those	sections	more	like	steep	hillocks.
There	 was	 no	 sign	 of	 sentries	 as	 moments	 later	 the	 men	 rode	 up	 to	 the	 walls	 and,	 dismounting
quickly,	positioned	the	ladders	and	scrambled	up	them	on	to	the	walls.	There	they	began	pushing	the
mud	 down,	 some	 kicking	 at	 it	 with	 their	 feet,	 others	 using	 spades	 they	 had	 carried	 strapped	 across
their	backs.	Soon,	about	thirty	feet	of	the	wall	had	been	reduced	to	no	more	than	a	low	mound	and
Bairam	Khan,	followed	by	his	qorchi,	was	leading	his	horsemen	quietly	into	the	camp.	The	rain	was
falling	 more	 heavily	 again	 and	 still	 there	 were	 no	 signs	 of	 alarm	 as	 Humayun	 himself	 and	 his
bodyguard	crossed	the	remains	of	the	wall.
Suddenly,	 however,	 a	 startled	 cry	 rang	 out	 from	 somewhere	 in	 front	 of	 Humayun.	 ‘The	 enemy!’
Another	fainter	shout	came	from	along	the	mud	walls,	then	the	much	louder	blare	of	a	trumpet	from
the	 same	 direction.	 Perhaps	 the	 dozing	 personnel	 of	 a	 guardhouse	 had	 woken	 to	 the	 peril	 that	 was
flowing	 all	 around	 them	 and	 were	 giving	 the	 alarm.	 There	 were	 answering	 trumpet	 blasts	 from
towards	the	centre	of	the	camp.
Now	 that	 surprise	 had	 been	 lost,	 Humayun	 realised	 that	 he	 and	 his	 men	 needed	 to	 advance	 as
quickly	as	possible	to	destroy	their	enemy	before	they	had	time	to	arm	and	to	form	up.	As	he	rode
over	 towards	 Bairam	 Khan	 to	 give	 him	 the	 order	 to	 ride	 for	 the	 centre	 of	 the	 camp,	 a	 straggling
volley	of	arrows	fell,	slanting	down	among	the	raindrops	from	the	direction	of	the	guard	post.	One
implanted	 itself	 in	 Humayun’s	 saddle.	 Another	 struck	 Bairam	 Khan’s	 breastplate	 and	 bounced
harmlessly	off	but	a	third	caught	Bairam	Khan’s	qorchi	in	the	thigh.	The	youth	clutched	at	his	leg	and
as	the	blood	began	to	run	through	his	fingers	stifled	a	cry.
‘Bind	his	wound	tightly,’	shouted	Humayun.	‘Get	him	back	to	our	camp	to	the	hakims.	He’s	young
and	has	been	brave.	He	deserves	to	live.’	One	of	Humayun’s	own	bodyguards	rushed	to	comply.
Another	 volley	 of	 arrows	 fell	 but	 they	 were	 few	 in	 number	 and	 the	 only	 casualty	 was	 a
cavalryman’s	bay	horse	which	slipped	to	the	ground,	two	black-flighted	arrows	protruding	from	its
neck.	Its	rider,	a	squat	Tajik,	jumped	clear	as	it	fell	but	slipped	as	he	landed	heavily	in	the	mud,	lying
winded	for	a	moment	before	scrambling	to	his	feet.
‘Bairam	 Khan,	 send	 forty	 men	 to	 locate	 the	 position	 those	 arrows	 came	 from	 and	 destroy	 the
enemy	archers.	The	rest	of	you,	charge	with	me	to	victory.’
As	 Bairam	 Khan	 quickly	 detached	 the	 men	 to	 deal	 with	 the	 guard	 post,	 Humayun	 drew	 Alamgir.
Holding	 the	 sword	 straight	 out	 in	 front	 of	 him,	 and	 with	 his	 bodyguard	 around	 him	 and	 Mustapha
Ergun	and	his	Turkish	mercenaries	close	behind,	he	kicked	his	black	stallion	into	as	near	a	gallop	as
it	could	come	to	in	the	mud,	riding	deeper	into	the	camp.	By	now	there	was	a	slight	lightening	of	the
sky	on	the	eastern	horizon,	the	precursor	of	dawn,	but	Humayun	could	still	see	little	through	the	rain
as	he	rode,	head	low	over	his	horse’s	neck.	Then,	after	a	minute	or	so,	he	managed	to	distinguish	the
dark	 shapes	 of	 close-packed	 lines	 of	 tents	 ahead	 and	 at	 the	 same	 time	 heard	 the	 cries	 of	 Sekunder
Shah’s	men	as	they	emerged	from	them,	pulling	their	weapons	from	their	scabbards.

‘Push	the	tents	over	to	trap	the	enemy	beneath.	Ride	down	any	who	are	already	outside.’	Following
his	own	orders,	Humayun	leaned	down	from	the	saddle	and	slashed	hard	at	the	guy	ropes	of	a	large
tent,	 which	 crumpled	 to	 the	 ground.	 Then	 he	 cut	 at	 a	 shadowy	 figure	 who,	 after	 emerging	 from	 a
second	tent,	was	raising	his	double	bow.	Humayun	felt	Alamgir	slice	deep	into	the	unprotected	flesh
of	the	man’s	chest	before	biting	into	his	ribs.	The	archer	twisted	and	fell	beneath	the	hooves	of	one	of
Humayun’s	advancing	cavalrymen,	who	was	in	turn	thrown.
All	 around	 other	 of	 Humayun’s	 soldiers	 were	 jumping	 from	 the	 saddle	 the	 better	 to	 collapse	 the
tents	and	to	come	to	close	quarters	with	their	enemy.	Soon	Humayun	could	make	out	men	rolling	in
the	 mud,	 fighting	 and	 stabbing	 at	 each	 other.	 He	 recognised	 one	 of	 his	 warriors,	 a	 curly-bearded,
muscular	Badakhshani	who	was	sitting,	smiling	broadly,	on	an	opponent’s	shoulders	pulling	his	head
back	by	the	hair.	As	Humayun	watched,	he	thrust	the	man’s	head	forward	again	down	into	a	quagmire
of	mud	and	water.	He	held	it	there	for	a	couple	of	minutes	before	throwing	the	lifeless	body	aside.
Another	of	his	men	had	run	to	a	line	of	tethered	cavalry	horses	and	was	slashing	at	their	leg	ropes.
As	he	cut	their	tethers,	he	whacked	each	horse	on	the	rump	to	send	it	galloping	away	into	the	gloom.
Good,	thought	Humayun,	it	could	only	add	to	the	panic	and	confusion	among	his	awakening	enemies.
Yet	 another	 of	 his	 soldiers	 had	 grabbed	 a	 lance	 from	 a	 rack	 outside	 one	 collapsed	 tent	 and	 was
stabbing	 at	 two	 figures	 struggling	 beneath	 its	 folds.	 Soon	 the	 squirming	 bodies	 were	 still	 and	 dark
stains	were	spreading	into	the	tent’s	material.
‘Come,’	Humayun	shouted	to	Mustapha	Ergun,	‘it’s	getting	lighter.	Now	we	can	see	more,	let	us	try
to	find	Sekunder	Shah’s	personal	quarters.	You	too,	Bairam	Khan,	follow	me	with	your	men.’
Soon,	 by	 the	 swiftly	 rising	 light,	 Humayun	 distinguished	 on	 a	 low	 rise	 about	 half	 a	 mile	 away	 a
collection	of	large	tents	erected	in	a	hollow	rectangle	with	a	big	flag	hanging	wet	and	limp	from	a
pole	outside	a	single	vast	tent	–	surely	Sekunder	Shah’s	own	–	at	its	centre.	As	Humayun	rode	closer,
he	saw	a	number	of	men	milling	around	the	tents.	Some	already	had	their	breastplates	and	helmets	on,
others	 were	 throwing	 saddles	 on	 their	 horses,	 clambering	 unprotected	 into	 them	 and	 forming	 up
ready	to	defend	themselves.
Moments	 later,	 Humayun	 heard	 a	 crackle	 of	 musket	 fire	 from	 beneath	 the	 awning	 of	 one	 of	 the
tents	–	at	least	some	of	Sekunder	Shah’s	men	had	kept	their	powder	dry.	Out	of	the	corner	of	his	eye,
he	 saw	 one	 of	 Mustapha	 Ergun’s	 Turks	 slide	 silently	 from	 his	 saddle	 with	 a	 bullet	 wound	 in	 his
temple.	His	frightened	horse	swerved	into	the	path	of	Humayun’s	own	mount.	Humayun	hastily	pulled
on	the	reins	of	his	horse	but	the	frightened	animal	reared	up.	It	took	all	Humayun’s	skill	to	retain	his
seat	 as	 his	 mount,	 dropping	 back	 on	 to	 its	 four	 legs,	 skittered	 sideways,	 further	 disrupting	 the
progress	of	his	other	cavalry.	They	in	turn,	seeing	Humayun’s	difficulty,	almost	instinctively	began	to
rein	in,	presenting	an	attractive	target	to	Sekunder	Shah’s	men.	A	flight	of	arrows	rose	from	another
of	 the	 tents,	 which	 were	 now	 becoming	 veiled	 in	 white	 smoke	 from	 the	 muskets.	 Several	 more	 of
Humayun’s	men	were	hit.	One	dropped	his	sword	and,	falling	headlong	into	the	mud,	lay	still.	Others
remained	in	the	saddle	but	slowly	dropped	back	from	their	comrades	to	tend	their	wounds.
Almost	 simultaneously,	 from	 Humayun’s	 flank	 came	 two	 louder	 explosions.	 Turning	 his	 head
towards	 the	 sound,	 Humayun	 realised	 that	 Sekunder	 Shah’s	 artillerymen	 had	 got	 two	 of	 his	 larger
cannon	 into	 action	 from	 where	 they	 had	 been	 dug	 in,	 protected	 from	 the	 wet	 by	 a	 rough,	 timberplanked	roof.	Each	cannon	ball	found	a	mark.	One	hit	a	black	horse	in	the	belly,	causing	it	to	collapse.
It	tried	to	stagger	to	its	feet,	its	intestines	protruding	from	the	gaping	wound,	before	subsiding	back
into	the	mud	neighing	piteously.	The	second	cannon	ball	carried	away	the	front	leg	of	another	horse
which	buckled	and	fell,	pitching	its	rider	–	another	of	Mustapha	Ergun’s	men	–	over	its	head.
It	 had	 all	 happened	 very	 quickly	 and	 as	 Humayun	 regained	 full	 control	 of	 his	 dancing	 horse	 a

sudden	thought	chilled	him.	He	might	be	being	drawn	into	a	carefully	prepared	trap.	Sekunder	Shah’s
men	might	even	now	be	circling	round	to	block	the	route	behind	them.	Surely	the	prize	of	the	throne
of	 Hindustan	 would	 not	 be	 ripped	 from	 his	 grasp	 once	 more?	 No,	 it	 could	 not	 be	 .	 .	 .	 He	 must	 not
falter	 in	 his	 moment	 of	 destiny,	 not	 let	 doubt	 stand	 in	 the	 way	 of	 overcoming	 this	 momentary
disorder.
‘Come	 on,	 regroup!	 We	 mustn’t	 lose	 impetus,’	 he	 yelled.	 Waving	 Alamgir	 he	 turned	 directly
towards	 the	 tents	 from	 which	 the	 musket	 men	 had	 fired	 and	 kicked	 his	 horse	 forward	 as	 fast	 as	 it
would	 go	 in	 the	 glossy	 deep	 mud.	 He	 was	 immediately	 followed	 by	 his	 bodyguard.	 Another	 few
musket	shots	rang	out	and	another	rider	fell	but	then	Humayun	was	among	the	enemy	musketeers	who
were	now	trying	to	flee,	throwing	aside	their	long	weapons	and	supporting	tripods.	Humayun	cut	one
down	with	a	slash	from	Alamgir	but	then	he	and	his	men	were	in	turn	charged	by	some	of	the	riders
he	had	seen	mounting	up	previously.	A	stout	officer	on	a	brown	horse	with	a	diamond	blaze	on	its
face	made	directly	for	Humayun,	his	lance	held	in	his	left	hand	aimed	at	Humayun’s	chest.
Humayun	 twisted	 his	 horse’s	 head	 and	 the	 lance	 struck	 a	 glancing	 blow	 against	 his	 breastplate,
knocking	him	slightly	off	balance	so	that	his	own	sword	slash	also	missed.	Both	men	wheeled	their
horses	round	tightly	and	the	officer	drew	his	sword	and	came	at	Humayun	again.	Humayun	ducked
under	his	arcing	sword	cut,	hearing	a	whooshing	sound	as	it	parted	the	air	above	his	head.Then	he
lunged	 with	 Alamgir	 at	 his	 opponent’s	 midriff,	 which	 was	 unprotected	 by	 chain	 mail.	 The	 sharp
sword	cut	deep	into	soft,	fatty	flesh	and,	bleeding	profusely,	the	officer	collapsed	over	the	neck	of	the
brown	horse,	which	bore	him	away	into	the	mêlée.
Humayun	next	attacked	an	imposing	red-turbaned	figure	he	saw	directing	the	fighting	a	little	way
off.	 As	 he	 rode	 closer,	 he	 saw	 the	 man	 pull	 a	 double-headed	 battleaxe	 from	 its	 sheath,	 which	 was
attached	to	his	saddle.	He	drew	back	his	arm	and	sent	the	battleaxe	spinning	through	the	air	towards
Humayun.	Humayun	got	his	mail-clad	arm	up	to	protect	his	head	but	the	sharp	axe	blade	caught	his
arm	a	glancing	blow.	It	was	heavy	enough	to	damage	Humayun’s	chain	mail	and	to	reopen	the	scar
tissue	of	the	wound	he	had	suffered	all	those	years	ago	at	the	battle	of	Chausa.	Bright	scarlet-orange
blood	 started	 to	 run	 down	 his	 arm	 and	 into	 the	 gauntlet	 on	 his	 hand.	 Humayun	 ignored	 it	 and,	 still
gripping	 Alamgir	 tightly,	 slashed	 at	 the	 man	 as	 he	 rode	 past	 him	 so	 close	 that	 their	 legs	 bumped
together.	 Humayun’s	 stroke	 caught	 the	 officer	 full	 on	 his	 throat,	 just	 above	 his	 Adam’s	 apple,
severing	 his	 neck	 and	 sending	 pulses	 of	 blood	 into	 the	 air	 from	 his	 torso	 for	 the	 few	 moments	 it
remained	erect	before	collapsing	from	the	saddle.
Breathing	hard,	Humayun	reined	in	his	horse	and	looked	around.	He	and	his	men	had	won	the	battle
around	the	command	tents.	To	his	left	he	could	see	Mustapha	Ergun	and	some	of	his	white-turbaned
warriors	pursuing	a	fleeing	band	of	Sekunder	Shah’s	cavalry	while	to	his	right	Bairam	Khan’s	men,
among	 whom	 Humayun	 could	 identify	 Akbar ’s	 milk-brother	 Adham	 Khan,	 had	 encircled	 another
large	group	who,	as	Humayun	watched,	flung	down	their	arms.
Bairam	 Khan	 rode	 up	 to	 Humayun.	 ‘Majesty,	 my	 junior	 commanders	 report	 that	 twenty	 of	 our
divisions	 have	 entered	 Sekunder	 Shah’s	 camp	 and	 more	 and	 more	 are	 doing	 so	 by	 the	 minute.	 We
have	killed	many	of	our	opponents	before	they	could	arm	and	captured	many	others,	while	yet	more
have	 fled	 in	 small	 groups	 in	 panic.	 We	 have	 already	 secured	 more	 than	 three-quarters	 of	 the	 camp.
However,	 our	 enemies	 are	 still	 resisting	 strongly	 and	 in	 numbers	 in	 the	 southwest	 corner.	 Some	 of
my	men	claim	they	saw	an	important	officer,	perhaps	Sekunder	Shah	himself,	riding	in	that	direction
with	a	bodyguard	from	the	command	tents	when	we	first	made	our	attack	on	them.’
‘Let’s	get	ourselves	over	there	to	organise	the	assault	and	attempt	to	capture	Sekunder	Shah	if	that
is	where	he	is.	But	first,	bind	this	wound	of	mine	with	my	neck	cloth,’	said	Humayun,	pulling	off	his

gauntlet	and	stretching	out	his	bloody	arm	to	Bairam	Khan.	Within	a	few	minutes,	Bairam	Khan	had
bound	 Humayun’s	 forearm	 tightly	 and	 the	 wound,	 which	 was	 not	 deep,	 had	 more	 or	 less	 stopped
bleeding.
Humayun	and	Bairam	Khan	headed	through	the	rain	across	the	slightly	undulating	ground	towards
the	 southwest	 corner	 of	 the	 camp,	 past	 collapsed	 tents,	 overturned	 cooking	 pots	 and	 the	 bodies	 of
dead	 and	 wounded	 men	 and	 animals	 lying	 slumped	 amid	 the	 puddles,	 some	 of	 which	 were	 now
stained	red.	As	they	drew	closer,	the	cries	and	sounds	of	battle	grew	louder,	including	the	occasional
crack	of	muskets	when	soldiers	from	one	side	or	the	other	managed	to	open	their	powder	horns	and
prime	 their	 muskets	 sufficiently	 quickly	 or	 under	 sufficient	 cover	 for	 the	 powder	 to	 remain	 dry
enough	to	ignite.
By	 the	 sombre	 leaden	 light	 of	 the	 new	 day,	 Humayun	 could	 see	 that	 Sekunder	 Shah’s	 men	 were
fighting	 determinedly.	 They	 had	 managed	 to	 overturn	 a	 number	 of	 baggage	 wagons	 around	 some
small	 hillocks,	 and	 archers	 and	 musketeers	 were	 firing	 from	 behind	 the	 protection	 they	 provided.
Several	 squadrons	 of	 cavalry	 were	 grouped	 in	 the	 middle	 of	 the	 barricades,	 whose	 perimeter
stretched	for	perhaps	twelve	hundred	yards.	There	appeared	to	be	several	thousand	of	the	enemy	in
total.	However,	they	were	completely	encircled	by	his	own	troops.
‘Bairam	Khan,	order	our	men	to	pull	back	just	a	little	but	to	keep	Sekunder	Shah’s	troops	securely
surrounded.	 We	 will	 offer	 them	 a	 chance	 to	 live	 if	 they	 will	 lay	 down	 their	 arms	 and	 tell	 us	 the
whereabouts	of	Sekunder	Shah.’
A	 quarter	 of	 an	 hour	 later,	 a	 gap	 was	 opened	 in	 Sekunder	 Shah’s	 barricades	 and	 Humayun’s
emissary,	a	young	officer	named	Bahadur	Khan,	re-emerged	and	galloped	over	to	where	Humayun
was	waiting,	seated	on	his	black	horse.
‘Majesty,	they	are	willing	to	surrender.	They	are	adamant	that	Sekunder	Shah	is	not	among	them
and	 that	 although	 it	 was	 indeed	 he	 who	 left	 the	 command	 tents	 with	 his	 bodyguard	 just	 after	 we
attacked,	 he	 did	 so	 in	 flight.	 They	 accuse	 him	 of	 deserting	 them	 to	 save	 himself	 and	 it	 is	 for	 that
reason	 that	 they	 have	 agreed	 to	 surrender.	 Several	 commanders	 actually	 volunteered	 to	 join	 our
armies.’
Relief	and	joy	swept	through	Humayun	in	equal	measure.	Victory	was	his.	He	had	surmounted	the
last	obstacle	to	his	regaining	Hindustan.	Even	if,	as	it	seemed,	he	had	failed	to	capture	Sekunder	Shah,
his	 victory	 was	 complete.	 Sekunder	 Shah’s	 vast	 army	 had	 been	 smashed	 in	 less	 than	 two	 hours	 of
combat.	 Those	 who	 remained	 unwounded	 had	 surrendered	 or	 fled.	 Voice	 shaking	 with	 emotion,
Humayun	spoke.
‘I	thank	you,	my	commanders.	We	have	won	a	great	victory.	Hindustan	is	firmly	within	our	grasp,
but	there	is	still	no	time	to	waste.	First	we	must	care	for	our	wounded	and	bury	our	dead,	but	then	we
move	on	to	Delhi	to	secure	that	great	city.’

Humayun	woke	to	the	sound	of	birdsong	in	his	scarlet	tent	at	the	centre	of	his	camp,	just	outside	the
great	sandstone	walls	of	Delhi.	Later	that	morning	he	was	due	to	make	his	ceremonial	entry	through
the	high	gateway	in	them	to	hear	the	khutba	read	once	more	in	his	name	at	the	service	in	the	Friday
Mosque,	 proclaiming	 him	 Padishah	 of	 Hindustan.The	 days	 since	 his	 victory	 at	 the	 battle	 of	 Sirhind
had	been	crowded	as	he	and	his	army	had	marched	as	quickly	as	the	monsoon	would	allow	towards

Delhi.	 Local	 rulers	 had	 hastened	 to	 offer	 their	 obeisance	 and	 groups	 of	 soldiers	 formerly	 loyal	 to
other	 of	 the	 pretenders	 to	 the	 throne	 had	 ridden	 in	 to	 surrender	 and	 to	 volunteer	 their	 services	 to
Humayun.
Four	days	ago	Humayun	had	passed	the	site	of	the	battle	of	Panipat	where	he	and	his	father	had	first
won	Hindustan.	Even	now,	twenty-nine	years	later,	the	white	bones	of	some	of	Sultan	Ibrahim’s	great
war	elephants	killed	by	Babur ’s	artillerymen	still	lay	scattered	across	the	plain.
The	previous	evening,	lying	in	his	tent,	Humayun	had	pondered	the	parallels	and	paradoxes	within
his	 own	 life	 and	 the	 comparisons	 with	 that	 of	 his	 father.	 He	 had	 lost	 his	 first	 great	 battle	 with	 Sher
Shah	 when	 his	 enemy	 had	 made	 a	 surprise	 night	 attack	 during	 the	 monsoon	 and	 won	 his	 last	 great
battle	against	Sekunder	Shah	by	using	those	same	tactics.	On	both	occasions	he	had	been	wounded	in
his	right	forearm.	His	forces	had	melted	away	after	his	defeat	by	Sher	Shah	just	as	they	had	grown	by
desertion	from	Sekunder	Shah	and	the	other	claimants	to	Hindustan	during	his	recent	campaign.	His
half-brothers	 had	 rebelled	 against	 him	 and	 threatened	 his	 family	 but	 Sher	 Shah’s	 relations	 had
exceeded	even	this.	Not	content	with	fighting	his	family,	Adil	Shah	had	killed	his	young	nephew,	the
legitimate	heir,	in	front	of	his	mother,	his	own	sister,	something	at	which	even	Kamran	had	baulked.
Humayun	 had	 gained	 the	 Koh-i-Nur	 for	 the	 Moghuls	 following	 the	 great	 victory	 at	 Panipat	 and
sacrificed	it	at	his	and	the	dynasty’s	nadir	to	help	bring	about	its	renaissance.	Like	his	father,	he	had
known	youthful	triumph	but	then	suffered	great	reverses	which	had	tested	his	resolve.	Persian	support
and	the	religious	compromises	it	had	demanded	had	proved	of	less	assistance	to	both	than	they	had
hoped.	Like	Babur,	he	had	spent	far	more	time	in	Kabul	than	he’d	intended	before	seizing	Hindustan.
Were	these	real	patterns,	just	as	in	the	movements	of	the	stars?	And	if	they	were,	how	did	they	come
about?	Were	events	inevitable,	predestined	and	laid	down	by	a	superior	power,	ready	to	be	read	within
the	 stars	 by	 anyone	 with	 insight,	 as	 he	 had	 once	 believed?	 Or,	 on	 the	 contrary,	 were	 the	 patterns	 in
men’s	lives	he	thought	he	saw	figments	of	his	imagination	and	its	search	for	structure	in	a	shifting
world,	 and	 the	 events	 themselves	 caused	 by	 coincidence	 or	 understandable	 similarities	 in
circumstances?	 Weren’t	 family	 rivalries	 inherent	 threats	 to	 ruling	 dynasties?	 Hadn’t	 Babur ’s	 own
half-brother	 rebelled	 against	 him	 and	 hadn’t	 Timur ’s	 sons	 disputed	 and	 dissipated	 their	 father ’s
legacy?	 Weren’t	 defeats	 always	 followed	 by	 desertions,	 great	 victories	 by	 swathes	 of	 fawning	 new
adherents?	Hadn’t	learning	from	his	father ’s	experience	and	using	it	to	strengthen	his	resolve	created
the	similarities	between	their	lives?
In	his	youth,	he	had	liked	to	believe	in	patterns	and	in	predestination.	Such	beliefs	had	seemed	to
absolve	 him	 from	 full	 responsibility	 for	 his	 actions	 and	 their	 consequences.	 They	 had	 fed	 his
indolence	and	justified	his	naive	trust	that	his	supreme	position	was	his	by	right	and	inviolable.	But
his	 experiences	 had	 changed	 him	 and	 now,	 in	 his	 maturity,	 he	 usually	 rejected	 such	 external
explanations	 –	 excuses	 for	 failure	 even.	 Although	 it	 was	 God’s	 will	 into	 which	 station	 a	 man	 was
born,	it	was	up	to	an	individual	and	his	use	of	his	abilities	to	shape	his	life	from	there	on.	He	had	not
regained	 his	 empire	 because	 it	 was	 predestined	 but	 because	 he	 had	 striven	 to	 do	 so,	 mastering	 his
weaknesses	 and	 spurning	 indulgences	 to	 focus	 all	 his	 efforts	 on	 that	 single	 goal.	 Proud	 of	 this
thought,	 Humayun	 had	 fallen	 asleep	 as	 he	 wondered	 how	 his	 renewed	 reign	 would	 evolve	 in
comparison	with	the	few	short	years	Babur	had	had	on	the	throne	after	conquering	Hindustan.
As	 he	 stood	 up	 and	 prepared	 to	 call	 Jauhar,	 Humayun	 recollected	 his	 thoughts	 of	 the	 previous
evening.	As	he	did	so,	his	eyes	happened	to	fall	on	one	of	his	volumes	of	star	charts.	He	smiled.	Even
if	he	no	longer	believed	that	the	stars	held	all	the	secrets	of	life,	the	study	of	them,	their	movements
and	 the	 reasons	 underlying	 them,	 still	 stimulated	 his	 intellect.	 Stargazing	 would	 never	 lose	 its
fascination	for	him.

Two	hours	later,	after	he	had	finished	dressing	him,	Jauhar	held	up	a	long,	burnished	mirror	for
Humayun	to	inspect	himself	in	his	imperial	finery.	He	saw	a	tall	figure	as	erect	and	muscular	at	fortyseven	years	of	age	as	he	had	been	when	he	first	had	come	to	the	throne,	even	if	the	hair	at	his	temples
was	now	flecked	with	grey	and	there	were	lines	around	his	eyes	and	at	the	corner	of	his	mouth	when
he	smiled.
He	was	wearing	a	white	surcoat	embroidered	with	suns	and	stars	in	gold	thread	and	hemmed	with	a
border	of	lustrous	pearls	over	a	long	cream	silk	tunic	and	pantaloons	of	the	same	colour.	His	belt	was
made	from	fine	gold	mesh	and	from	it	hung	Alamgir	in	its	jewelled	scabbard.	On	his	feet	were	short
tawny	leather	boots	with	curled,	pointed	toes	and	a	massive	gold	star	embroidered	on	each	side	of	the
ankles.	On	his	head	he	wore	a	turban	of	gold	cloth	with	a	peacock	plume	set	at	its	peak	and	a	circlet	of
rubies	around	its	middle	which	matched	his	heavy	ruby	and	gold	necklace.	On	the	index	finger	of	his
right	hand	he	wore	Timur ’s	tiger	ring	and	his	other	fingers	sparkled	emeralds	and	sapphires.
‘Thank	you,	Jauhar;	you	have	helped	me	to	dress	as	befits	an	emperor.	I’ve	learned	that	as	well	as
being	 powerful	 and	 possessing	 authority	 it	 is	 well	 to	 appear	 so	 to	 the	 people.	 It	 adds	 to	 their
confidence	and	loyalty	.	.	.	but	enough	of	that.	Where	is	my	son?’
‘Waiting	outside.’
‘Ask	him	to	come	in.’
Moments	 later,	 Akbar	 appeared	 through	 the	 curtains	 at	 the	 entrance	 to	 the	 tent,	 which	 were	 held
open	by	two	bodyguards	dressed	entirely	in	green.	Even	though	not	yet	thirteen,	Akbar	was	almost	as
tall	 and	 broad-shouldered	 as	 his	 father.	 He	 too	 was	 dressed	 in	 royal	 finery,	 in	 purple	 and	 lilac,
colours	which	only	seemed	to	accentuate	his	burgeoning,	youthful	masculinity.
‘Father,’	 said	 Akbar,	 for	 once	 speaking	 first	 and	 smiling	 broadly,	 ‘one	 of	 the	 messengers	 who
relays	post	from	Kabul	to	Hindustan	arrived	a	quarter	of	an	hour	ago.	He	brought	a	letter	to	us	both
from	my	mother.	By	now	she	will	already	have	set	out	from	Kabul	to	join	us	as	you	suggested	after
the	battle	of	Sirhind.	She	should	reach	Delhi	in	six	to	eight	weeks	if	the	monsoon	does	not	delay	her
too	much.’
Humayun	felt	a	lightness	in	his	heart.	Hamida’s	presence	would	complete	his	happiness.	The	sooner
he	 could	 keep	 his	 promise	 made	 on	 their	 marriage	 fourteen	 years	 ago	 to	 offer	 her	 the	 life	 of	 an
empress	in	Delhi	and	Agra	the	better.	‘This	is	great	news,	Akbar.	We	must	send	orders	immediately
for	a	detachment	of	troops	to	meet	her	and	to	speed	her	on	her	way	to	us.’
Then	Humayun	walked	slowly	with	Akbar	from	the	tent	towards	where	two	imperial	elephants	were
kneeling	 about	 two	 hundred	 and	 fifty	 yards	 away.	 Jauhar	 and	 Adham	 Khan,	 who	 were	 to	 ride	 with
them,	followed	a	few	respectful	paces	behind.	As	they	walked,	attendants	held	silk	canopies	over	their
heads	to	protect	them	from	the	sun	since	there	had	been	a	break	in	the	monsoon.	Others	waved	large
peacock-feather	fans	to	cool	them	and	to	repel	the	buzzing	mosquitoes	which	proliferated	around	the
stagnant	puddles	which	still	covered	the	camp.
Once	they	reached	the	elephants,	Humayun	climbed	up	a	small,	gilded	ladder	on	to	the	back	of	the
larger	of	the	two.	He	was	followed	by	Jauhar	and	one	of	the	tall	green-clad	bodyguards,	who	took
their	 places	 behind	 him.	 The	 jewels	 –	 mostly	 garnets	 and	 amethysts	 –	 which	 encrusted	 the	 howdah
shone	in	the	sunlight	as	the	first	elephant	rose	to	its	feet,	followed	by	the	second	only	slightly	smaller
one	which	held	Akbar,	Adham	Khan	and	another	bodyguard.	Akbar	was	chatting	to	his	milk-brother
as	if	they	were	merely	going	hunting.
Together,	the	stately	elephants	plodded	slowly	over	towards	a	line	of	their	companions.	Humayun
could	see	Bairam	Khan	in	one	of	their	howdahs,	accoutred	in	Persian	court	fashion.	Beside	him	was
his	qorchi	who	had	recovered	from	his	thigh	wound,	although	it	had	required	painful	cauterising	and

he	 would	 never	 walk	 without	 a	 limp	 again.	 Zahid	 Beg	 was	 to	 ride	 on	 the	 elephant	 immediately
following	Bairam	Khan	and	Ahmed	Khan	would	ride	on	the	leading	elephant	on	Humayun’s	orders.
‘You	 have	 deserved	 this	 honour	 –	 you	 always	 led	 the	 way	 when	 there	 was	 no	 prestige	 but	 much
danger,’	he	had	told	him.
Mustapha	 Ergun	 and	 his	 men	 would	 be	 among	 the	 leading	 squadrons	 of	 cavalry	 which	 would
precede	the	elephants.	For	a	moment	Humayun	reflected	on	some	of	the	other	humbler	people	who
had	 played	 a	 part	 in	 his	 story.	 He	 would	 have	 liked	 one-armed	 Wazim	 Pathan	 and	 even	 Nizam	 the
water-carrier	 to	 be	 present	 but	 Wazim	 Pathan	 had	 preferred	 to	 stay	 in	 his	 village	 as	 headman	 after
Kamran’s	defeat	and	there	had	been	no	time	to	search	for	Nizam.	Then,	pulling	himself	back	to	the
present,	Humayun	spoke.	‘Let’s	get	going.’
The	order	was	relayed	down	the	line	of	elephants	through	the	ranks	of	cavalry	to	the	riders	at	the
very	 front	 of	 the	 procession	 who	 carried	 the	 great	 fluttering	 banners	 of	 Humayun	 and	 the	 Moghul
dynasty	as	well	as	that	of	Timur.	As	they	got	underway	towards	the	tall	sandstone	gateway	half	a	mile
ahead	 of	 them,	 the	 phalanxes	 of	 drummers	 and	 trumpeters	 immediately	 behind	 the	 banner	 bearers
began	 to	 play,	 quietly	 at	 first	 and	 then	 with	 increasing	 vigour	 as	 they	 approached	 the	 thronging
crowds	 whom	 ranks	 of	 soldiers	 had	 kept	 back	 from	 the	 camp	 but	 who	 now	 lined	 the	 ceremonial
pathway	to	the	gate,	which	they	had	strewn	with	palm	branches	and	even	flower	petals.
As	 Humayun’s	 elephant	 moved	 forward,	 he	 watched	 the	 sunlight	 glinting	 off	 the	 breastplates	 and
harnesses	of	the	cavalry	ahead	and	the	gilded	howdah	in	front	of	him	and	listened	to	the	sound	of	the
music	 and	 the	 jangling	 of	 harnesses	 and	 neighing	 of	 animals	 being	 all	 but	 drowned	 out	 by	 the
cheering	of	the	crowds.	Then,	heart	bursting	with	emotion,	he	looked	upwards	into	the	hot,	blue	sky
and	saw	–	or	thought	he	saw	–	in	the	shimmering	glare	two	circling	eagles,	harbingers	of	Moghul
greatness.	Hindustan	was	his.	He	had	recovered	the	Moghul	throne.	From	now	on	their	dynasty	would
only	go	from	strength	to	strength.	He	–	and	Akbar	–	would	ensure	it	was	so.

Chapter	27
The	Stars	Smile	Down
Humayun	was	sitting	in	his	private	chambers	in	the	Purana	Qila,	the	red	sandstone	fortress	that	early
in	his	reign	he	had	begun	building	on	Delhi’s	eastern	edge	but	Sher	Shah	and	his	son	Islam	Shah	had
completed.	The	fortress’s	thick,	well-buttressed	walls,	pierced	by	three	gatehouses,	snaked	for	over	a
mile	 and	 it	 made	 a	 fine	 imperial	 headquarters.	 Piled	 on	 a	 table	 before	 Humayun	 were	 the	 official
imperial	ledgers	recording	the	administration	of	the	empire	under	Sher	Shah	and	his	son	that	Jauhar	–
whom	he	had	made	Comptroller	of	the	Household	in	thanks	for	his	years	of	selfless	service	–	had	just
brought	him.
Now	that	the	lush	ceremonial	and	festivities	of	his	entry	into	Delhi	had	come	to	an	end,	Humayun
knew	 he	 must	 discipline	 himself	 to	 learn	 in	 earnest	 about	 how	 his	 empire	 worked	 and	 not	 simply
relax	and	enjoy	once	more	the	indulgences	his	newly	regained	territories	could	offer.	As	he	had	told
his	 counsellors,	 ‘Our	 job	 is	 still	 only	 half	 done.	 Recapturing	 Hindustan	 was	 perhaps	 the	 easiest
part.We	must	ensure	we	keep	it	and	then	expand	our	rule.’	He	had	already	questioned	those	of	Sher
Shah’s	and	Islam	Shah’s	officials	who	had	remained	in	Delhi	and	despatched	trusted	commanders	 to
inspect	and	rule	the	various	provinces,	among	them	Ahmed	Khan	to	Agra.
Frowning	 slightly,	 he	 began	 to	 read.	 Despite	 himself,	 what	 the	 usurpers	 had	 achieved	 impressed
him.The	ledgers	revealed	that	Sher	Shah	had	been	as	tough,	cunning	and	effective	an	organiser	as	he
had	 been	 a	 cold-blooded	 and	 calculating	 warrior.	 He	 had	 reorganised	 the	 system	 of	 provincial
government	to	prevent	any	individual	governor	from	becoming	too	powerful.	He	had	restructured	the
collection	 of	 revenue.	 Of	 course,	 during	 the	 recent	 wars,	 tax-gathering	 had	 been	 at	 best	 spasmodic
and	 chaotic,	 but	 Humayun’s	 own	 officials	 had	 already	 reported	 that	 the	 foundations	 of	 Sher	 Shah’s
system	were	still	in	place	and	robust	enough	to	be	revived.	And	that	was	all	to	Humayun’s	advantage.
What	was	it	his	father	had	written	in	his	diary?	.	.	.	at	least	this	place	has	plenty	of	money.	Controlling
the	wealth	of	Hindustan	would,	Humayun	knew,	be	key	to	retaining	and	extending	his	power.
Sher	 Shah	 had	 improved	 roads,	 rebuilt	 the	 old	 mud-walled	 caravanserais	 along	 them	 and
constructed	 new	 ones	 so	 travellers	 could	 find	 shelter	 every	 five	 miles.	 But	 the	 main	 purpose	 of	 the
caravanserais	was	to	act	as	post	houses	–	dak	chauki	–	for	the	messengers	and	horses	that	speeded	the
imperial	mail	along	the	new	highways	and	made	it	possible	to	know	quickly	what	was	happening	in
the	most	distant	regions	of	the	empire.
To	prevent	rebellion,	Sher	Shah	had	built	new	forts	to	control	the	provinces	and	stamped	hard	on
lawlessness	of	any	kind.	Humayun	reread	a	passage	that	had	particularly	caught	his	eye:	In	his	infinite
wisdom	 and	 unbounded	 goodness,	 His	 Imperial	 Majesty	 Sher	 Shah	 has	 decreed	 that	 every	 headman
shall	protect	his	village	lest	any	vile	thief	or	murderer	should	attack	a	traveller	and	thus	become	the
instrument	of	his	injury	or	death.	When	Sher	Shah	had	said	the	headman	must	be	responsible	he	had
meant	it.	If	the	perpetrator	of	a	crime	was	not	apprehended,	the	headman	himself	had	been	forced	to
suffer	the	punishment.
Putting	 down	 the	 heavy,	 leather-bound	 ledger	 on	 the	 inlaid	 marble	 table	 beside	 him,	 Humayun

smiled	to	recollect	his	own	early	days	on	the	throne.	How	bored	he	would	have	been	even	thinking	of
some	 of	 the	 things	 that	 had	 preoccupied	 Sher	 Shah.	 What	 was	 heroic	 about	 collecting	 taxes	 or
reorganising	 provinces	 or	 building	 roads?	 But	 now	 he	 could	 see	 that	 such	 things	 were	 essential	 to
maintaining	 power.	 Had	 he	 focused	 more	 on	 them	 and	 less	 on	 seeking	 the	 answers	 to	 good
government	in	the	stars	and	in	opium,	he	might	not	have	lost	Hindustan.
What	mattered	now	was	not	to	overturn	what	Sher	Shah	and	Islam	Shah	had	done	but	to	retain	the
best	elements	so	he	could	strengthen	his	own	authority	over	Hindustan	.	.	.	But	there	was	one	change
he	would	make.	Though	Delhi	had	been	Sher	Shah’s	capital	and	the	Purana	Qila	was	a	palace-fortress
fit	for	an	emperor,	he	yearned	to	be	in	Agra	once	more,	the	city	Babur	had	made	his	capital.	As	soon
as	he	could,	he	would	move	his	court	there.	Hamida	had	never	seen	Agra,	and	together	they	would
create	a	place	of	such	beauty	that	his	court	poets	would	require	all	their	skill	to	capture	it	in	words.
But	 for	 the	 time	 being	 Delhi	 was	 better	 placed	 strategically	 for	 the	 tour	 of	 all	 the	 provinces	 of	 his
empire	he	was	planning	in	the	next	few	months	to	remind	the	ordinary	people	of	Hindustan,	buffeted
as	they’d	been	by	the	winds	of	war,	who	their	true	emperor	was	–	and	that	he	was	powerful	.	.	.
‘Majesty,	 Empress	 Hamida’s	 caravan	 is	 just	 five	 miles	 from	 the	 city.’	 An	 attendant	 interrupted
Humayun’s	thoughts	and	his	heart	leaped.	He	knew	his	wife	had	been	making	good	progress,	but	that
she	 was	 here	 so	 soon	 was	 a	 great	 surprise.	 He	 stood,	 overcome	 with	 joy	 and	 longing	 for	 her.	 The
administration	 of	 the	 empire	 could	 wait.‘Bring	 me	 my	 imperial	 robes.	 I	 must	 look	 my	 best	 for	 my
wife.	Even	then	she	will	outshine	me	by	far.’
Humayun	watched	the	slow	approach	of	Hamida’s	procession	from	the	top	of	the	western	gate	of
the	Purana	Qila.	It	was	the	most	magnificent	of	the	entrances,	with	its	tall	pointed	arch	inset	with	white
marble	 stars	 and	 two	 round	 flanking	 towers,	 and	 it	 was	 through	 this	 gate	 that	 Hamida,	 Moghul
Empress	 of	 Hindustan,	 was	 making	 her	 entrance.	 The	 elephant	 carrying	 her	 was	 clad	 in	 plates	 of
beaten	gold	and	even	its	tusks	were	gilded.	As	it	passed	beneath	the	western	gate,	the	trumpeters	in	the
gatehouse	sounded	their	instruments	and	attendants	threw	fistfuls	of	rose	petals	and	tiny	twists	of	gold
leaf	from	the	roof.	Humayun	hurried	down	to	an	inner	courtyard	where	a	vast	green	velvet	tent	had
been	 erected,	 with	 awnings	 fringed	 with	 green	 ribbons	 and	 the	 entrance	 curtains	 tied	 back	 with
tasselled	 golden	 cords.	 Within	 the	 tent	 Humayun	 could	 see	 the	 block	 of	 pure	 white	 marble	 placed
ready	for	Hamida	to	dismount	in	privacy.
Hamida’s	elephant	was	coming	into	the	courtyard	now	and	the	mahout,	seated	on	the	beast’s	neck,
carefully	 guided	 it	 towards	 the	 great	 tent	 and	 on	 through	 the	 opening.	 Then,	 tapping	 his	 metal	 staff
gently	 against	 first	 the	 right	 and	 then	 the	 left	 shoulder	 of	 the	 elephant,	 he	 caused	 it	 to	 kneel	 by	 the
marble	block.	As	soon	as	the	animal	had	lowered	itself,	the	mahout	slid	down	and	stood	respectfully
to	one	side.	Humayun	approached	the	howdah	and,	stepping	on	to	the	block,	gently	pulled	aside	the
shimmering	gold	mesh.
As	she	smiled	back	at	him,	Hamida	seemed	more	beautiful	than	ever	in	gold-embroidered	robes,
her	long,	black,	sandalwood-scented	hair	spilling	over	her	shoulders	and,	rising	and	falling	on	her
breast,	 the	 necklace	 of	 rubies	 and	 emeralds	 that	 had	 been	 his	 wedding	 gift	 to	 her	 and	 they	 had
preserved	through	so	many	misfortunes.
‘Leave	us,’	Humayun	ordered	the	mahouts.	As	soon	as	they	were	alone,	he	lifted	Hamida	from	the
howdah	and	held	her	against	him.	‘My	queen,’	he	whispered,	‘my	empress	.	.	.	’
That	 night	 they	 made	 love	 in	 the	 apartments	 he	 had	 had	 prepared	 for	 Hamida	 overlooking	 the
Jumna	river.	They	had	once	formed	a	part	of	Islam	Shah’s	haram	and	the	carved	alcoves,	set	with	tiny
pieces	 of	 mirror	 glass,	 sparkled	 like	 diamonds	 in	 the	 candlelight.	 Frankincense	 glowed	 in	 slenderlegged	golden	burners	at	each	corner	of	the	room	and	scented	water	bubbled	from	a	marble	fountain

carved	to	resemble	the	petals	of	a	rosebud.
Hamida	was	naked	except	for	her	necklace	and	Humayun	stroked	the	satin	skin	of	her	hip.	‘At	last	I
can	give	you	what	I	promised	you.	During	our	flight	across	the	Rajasthan	desert	sometimes	at	night
when	 I	 couldn’t	 sleep	 I’d	 watch	 the	 stars,	 wondering	 what	 messages	 they	 held	 and	 finding	 some
comfort	there.	But	you	were	my	greatest	solace	–	so	brave,	so	resolute,	so	patient,	even	when	all	we
had	to	eat	was	mule	flesh	boiled	in	a	soldier ’s	helmet	over	a	dung	fire	.	.	.	’
Hamida	smiled.‘I	still	remember	how	shocked	I	was	when	my	father	told	me	you	wanted	to	marry
me	.	.	.	I’d	only	seen	you	from	far	off	.	.	.	you	seemed	like	a	god	.	.	.	On	our	wedding	night	I	was	still
nervous,	but	when	you	came	to	me	I	saw	your	love	for	me	burning	so	bright	that	I	knew	you	would
become	a	part	of	me	.	.	.	you	have	.	.	.	you	are	my	life	.	.	.	’
‘And	you	are	mine	.	.	.	but	let	me	prove	to	you	once	again	that	I	am	indeed	a	man,	not	a	god.’	As
Humayun	pulled	Hamida	to	him,	he	saw	the	answering	gleam	in	her	brown	eyes.

‘Majesty,	a	post-rider	has	arrived	with	a	message	from	Bairam	Khan.’
‘Bring	him	to	me	immediately.’	Humayun	paced	his	apartments	as	he	waited.	At	last	.	.	.	but	what
news	did	the	man	bring?	It	was	nearly	three	months	since	Bairam	Khan	had	ridden	out	at	the	head	of
twenty	thousand	troops	to	deal	with	a	sudden	and	serious	threat	to	Humayun’s	supremacy.	Though	in
the	aftermath	of	the	battle	at	Sirhind	Sekunder	Shah	had	fled	into	the	foothills	of	the	Himalayas,	he
had	reappeared	on	the	plains	of	the	Punjab	where	he	had	been	seeking	to	rally	support.	Bairam	Khan’s
early	reports	had	been	encouraging,	suggesting	that	he	might	soon	be	upon	Sekunder	Shah	and	his
forces,	 but	 then	 Sekunder	 Shah	 had	 retreated	 back	 into	 the	 mountains.	 Bairam	 Khan’s	 last	 despatch,
received	nearly	a	month	ago,	reported	his	plan	to	pursue	him	there.	Since	then	there	had	been	silence.
Humayun’s	 greatest	 fears,	 as	 day	 followed	 day,	 had	 been	 for	 Akbar.	 His	 son	 had	 begged	 to	 be
allowed	 to	 accompany	 Bairam	 Khan	 and	 Humayun	 had	 reluctantly	 agreed,	 ordering	 that	 Akbar	 be
kept	back	from	the	fighting	and	placing	him	in	the	special	care	of	Nadim	Khwaja,	father	of	Akbar ’s
milk-brother	Adham	Khan	who	was	also	to	go.	Though	it	had	filled	him	with	pride,	it	had	been	hard
to	 watch	 his	 only	 son	 ride	 off	 cheerfully	 to	 war.	 It	 had	 been	 even	 more	 difficult	 for	 Hamida	 and
though	they	had	resolutely	avoided	discussing	it	he	knew	how	many	restless	nights	she	had	endured.
But	now,	with	luck,	the	waiting	would	soon	be	over.
As	 he	 was	 ushered	 into	 Humayun’s	 presence,	 the	 post-rider ’s	 dusty	 clothes	 and	 stiff-legged	 gait
spoke	of	many	hours	in	the	saddle.	Bowing	before	Humayun,	he	reached	into	his	leather	satchel	and
extracted	a	folded	letter.	‘My	orders	were	to	hand	this	to	no	one	but	you,	Majesty.’	Humayun	took	the
letter	 eagerly	 but	 then	 felt	 a	 sudden	 reluctance	 to	 know	 its	 contents.	 But	 that	 was	 foolish	 thinking.
Slowly	he	unfolded	the	letter	and	saw	the	lines	of	Persian	written	in	Bairam	Khan’s	neat,	elegant	hand.
Rejoice,	Majesty.	Your	armies	have	defeated	the	traitor	Sekunder	Shah	who	has	fled	like	a	coward
eastward	 to	 Bengal,	 leaving	 his	 men	 to	 their	 fate.	 We	 have	 taken	 five	 thousand	 prisoners	 and	 great
booty.	 Within	 a	 month,	 God	 willing,	 I	 hope	 to	 lead	 your	 troops	 back	 into	 Delhi	 and	 have	 the	 joy	 of
reporting	in	detail	the	story	of	our	campaign.	Your	son	is	in	good	health	and	begs	to	send	his	respects
to	you	and	Her	Imperial	Majesty.
For	a	moment	Humayun	bowed	his	head	in	silent	joy.	Then	he	shouted	to	his	attendants,	‘Order	the
drums	to	be	beaten	above	the	gates	of	the	fortress	and	on	the	city	walls.	We	have	won	a	great	victory

and	the	world	must	know.’

Just	as	the	sky	was	pinkening	in	the	west,	Humayun	heard	the	strident	blast	of	trumpets	that	announced
that	Bairam	Khan	was	riding	in	through	the	western	gate.	Moments	later,	one	of	Humayun’s	personal
attendants	came	to	help	him	dress	in	a	coat	of	dark	green	brocade	with	emerald	fastenings.
‘You	have	the	gift	I	wish	to	present	to	Bairam	Khan?’
‘Yes,	Majesty.’
‘Then	 let	 us	 proceed.’	 Followed	 by	 six	 bodyguards,	 Humayun	 made	 his	 way	 to	 the	 audience
chamber	 and	 entered	 through	 the	 arched	 door	 to	 the	 right	 of	 his	 gilded	 throne.	 His	 courtiers,
commanders	and	officials	–	Jauhar	among	them	–	were	already	grouped	in	a	semicircle	facing	the
throne.	Their	robes	and	tunics	of	every	hue	from	saffron	yellow	and	red	to	purple	and	blue	were	as
brilliant	as	the	rich	carpet	from	Tabriz	on	which	they	were	standing.	Jewels	sparkled	in	their	turbans,
around	their	necks	and	on	their	fingers.	At	the	sight	of	Humayun,	all	bowed	low.
His	 impulse	 was	 to	 stride	 right	 past	 them	 and	 on	 through	 the	 open	 double	 doors	 of	 polished
mulberry	into	the	antechamber	beyond,	where	he	could	see	Bairam	Khan	and	Akbar	waiting.	But	he
had	summoned	his	courtiers	to	witness	the	homecoming	of	a	victorious	general	and	must	give	them	a
dignified	 spectacle.	 Seating	 himself	 on	 his	 throne,	 Humayun	 raised	 his	 hand.	 ‘Let	 Bairam	 Khan
approach.’	He	watched	as	his	commander	entered	the	chamber	and	made	his	way	slowly	towards	the
throne,	then	halted	and	bowed.
‘Bairam	 Khan,	 you	 are	 welcome,’	 said	 Humayun,	 then	 gestured	 to	 his	 attendant	 who	 stepped
forward	 with	 a	 bag	 of	 turquoise	 velvet.	 Loosening	 the	 cord	 of	 twisted	 silver	 thread	 at	 its	 neck,
Humayun	tipped	the	contents	into	his	left	hand	and	extended	it	towards	Bairam	Khan.	Those	closest	to
the	throne	gasped	as	they	saw	the	dark	red	glitter	of	rubies.
‘Bairam	Khan,	you	are	a	soldier	to	whom	such	fripperies	as	this	gift	of	gems	mean	little.	But	I	have
something	 else	 to	 give.	 You	 will	 become	 my	 khan-i-khanan,	 commander-in-chief	 of	 the	 imperial
Moghul	armies.’
‘Majesty.’	 Bairam	 Khan	 bowed	 low	 once	 more,	 but	 not	 before	 Humayun	 had	 seen	 his	 dark	 blue
eyes	flash	with	surprise.	It	was	a	good	way	to	reward	the	general	who	had	left	his	Persian	homeland
for	 him	 and	 served	 with	 such	 distinction.	 Zahid	 Beg	 might	 also	 have	 expected	 the	 honour	 and	 had
certainly	deserved	it,	but	he	had	recently	asked	leave	to	return	to	his	ancestral	lands	near	Kabul.	He
was	growing	old	and	stiff,	he	had	told	Humayun.	His	days	as	a	warrior	were	nearly	done,	but	if	ever
Humayun	had	need	of	him	he	would	come.
Humayun	looked	over	Bairam	Khan’s	head	to	address	his	courtiers.	‘On	the	night	of	the	next	full
moon,	we	will	illuminate	the	Purana	Qila	with	so	many	lamps	and	candles	that	its	radiance	will	rival
the	 moon	 itself	 and	 we	 will	 feast	 to	 celebrate	 this	 victory.’	 Humayun	 turned	 again	 to	 his	 attendant.
‘Now	summon	my	beloved	son	before	me.’
As	Akbar	entered	Humayun	saw	with	love	and	pride	how	much	he	had	altered	in	the	months	he	had
been	away.	He	looked	even	taller	and	his	broad,	muscular	shoulders	strained	against	the	green	cloth
of	his	tunic.	He	was	also,	Humayun	noted,	looking	more	than	a	little	pleased	with	himself.	But	as	his
son	 drew	 nearer	 and	 touched	 his	 right	 hand	 to	 his	 breast	 in	 salute,	 he	 saw	 it	 was	 bandaged.	 Before
Humayun	could	ask	the	cause,	Bairam	Khan,	who	had	seen	the	direction	of	his	glance,	spoke.

‘Majesty,	 as	 you	 instructed	 I	 ensured	 that	 during	 major	 actions	 the	 prince	 was	 well	 protected	 by
bodyguards.	But	late	one	afternoon,	not	many	days	after	we	had	crushed	Sekunder	 Shah,	 my	 scouts
reported	that	they	had	spotted	a	band	of	his	men	in	the	foothills.	I	decided	to	lead	a	party	of	a	thousand
cavalry,	together	with	a	few	small	baggage	wagons	carrying	weapons	and	supplies,	in	pursuit	and	to
take	Akbar	with	me	to	gain	experience	of	such	operations.	I	thought	there	would	be	little	danger.	But
as	we	were	riding	up	a	narrow	ravine,	there	was	a	sudden	rockslide	and	amid	the	shower	of	pebbles
and	scree	several	heavy	boulders	came	crashing	down,	killing	three	of	my	men	and	blocking	the	way.
‘Most	of	the	column	had	already	passed	beyond	that	point	but	the	last	hundred	or	so	riders	and	our
few	 wagons	 were	 now	 cut	 off	 from	 the	 main	 party.	 With	 darkness	 falling	 and	 the	 risk	 of	 further
rockslides,	I	shouted	to	those	who	had	been	separated	from	us	to	retreat	back	the	way	they’d	come.	I
then	moved	the	rest	of	the	column	quickly	out	of	the	ravine	and	returned	with	some	of	our	strongest
men	to	attempt	to	clear	the	debris.	But	it	quickly	became	obvious	we	could	not	complete	the	task	until
the	light	returned	.	.	.	My	greatest	anxiety	was	for	the	prince	who	with	his	milk-brother	was	among
those	we	could	not	reach,	but	.	.	.	’	here	Bairam	Khan	paused,	‘I	should	let	him	tell	his	own	story	.	.	.	’
‘I’d	heard	Bairam	Khan	ordering	us	to	get	out	of	the	ravine,’	Akbar	continued	eagerly,	‘but	just	as
we	were	turning	the	baggage	wagons	–	which	wasn’t	easy,	the	defile	was	narrow	–	we	were	suddenly
attacked	by	men	swarming	about	on	a	rock	shelf	high	above	us.	From	what	little	we	could	see	of	them
they	didn’t	look	like	soldiers	of	Sekunder	Shah.	They	were	poorly	armed	–	no	muskets,	just	arrows
and	spears.	I	think	they	were	probably	mountain	tribesmen	who’d	been	observing	our	progress	and
hoped	for	a	chance	of	plunder.	Perhaps	they’d	even	caused	the	landslip	.	.	.	Whoever	they	were,	their
arrows	and	spears	were	soon	falling	thickly	around	us	and	several	of	our	men	were	hit.
‘I	shouted	to	our	troops	to	take	cover	behind	the	wagons	and	then	ordered	the	few	musketeers	we
had	with	us	to	fire	at	our	assailants.	They	had	the	sinking	orange	sun	in	their	eyes	but	the	flash	and
bang	of	their	guns	was	enough	to	frighten	our	attackers	off	and	we	got	at	least	one	of	them.	His	body
came	tumbling	down	and	when	we	inspected	it	we	found	a	musket	ball	in	his	forehead.	Though	we
remained	on	guard	all	that	night	they	didn’t	return	and	next	morning,	after	the	fallen	rock	had	been
cleared,	we	were	reunited	with	the	main	column.’
‘And	your	hand?’
‘My	first	battle	wound	–	a	graze	from	an	arrow.	Adham	Khan	saw	it	coming	and	pushed	me	to	one
side	or	it	might	have	hit	me	in	the	body	.	.	.	’	Akbar ’s	amber-brown	eyes	–	so	like	Hamida’s	–	had
been	glowing	as	he	had	relived	the	skirmish.
‘You	 acquitted	 yourself	 bravely	 and	 well,’	 said	 Humayun.	 Privately	 he	 wondered	 what	 Hamida,
watching	 and	 listening	 behind	 the	 grille	 set	 high	 in	 the	 wall	 to	 the	 right	 of	 his	 throne,	 would	 be
thinking.	 But	 despite	 her	 maternal	 fears	 she	 should	 be	 as	 proud	 of	 Akbar	 as	 he	 was.	 He	 had	 shown
coolness	 and	 resourcefulness	 –	 essential	 survival	 skills	 for	 an	 emperor	 and	 ones	 that	 could	 not	 be
acquired	too	early.

That	night,	Humayun	ate	with	Hamida	and	Akbar	in	the	haram.	As	he	looked	at	his	exquisite	wife	and
handsome,	athletic	son	bursting	with	confidence	and	youthful	vitality,	he	felt	a	deeper	content	than	he
had	perhaps	ever	known.	The	pieces	of	his	fragmented	life	seemed	to	have	fallen	into	place	at	last.
The	 empire	 that	 God	 in	 his	 wisdom	 and	 mercy	 had	 allowed	 him	 to	 take	 back	 was	 secure	 and	 with

Akbar	 by	 his	 side	 he	 would	 expand	 it.	 And	 one	 day	 Akbar	 in	 turn	 would	 launch	 his	 own	 wars	 of
conquest	and	extend	the	Moghul	lands	from	sea	to	sea.
Hamida	 too	 looked	 happy.	 Her	 face	 had	 acquired	 a	 new	 bloom	 and	 her	 clinging	 silk	 garments
showed	the	supple,	fluid	outline	of	her	body	that,	grown	a	little	more	voluptuous	since	the	days	of	her
girlhood,	was	even	more	beautiful.	Tonight	ornaments	of	blue	sapphires	set	with	diamonds	sparkled
in	her	flowing	dark	hair,	and	another	sapphire	was	in	her	navel	left	bare	by	low,	wide-cut	trousers	of
duck-egg	blue	and	a	short,	tight-fitting	bodice	that	revealed	the	swell	of	her	breasts.
‘How	is	it	with	my	empress?’	Humayun	asked	when	Akbar	left	them	and	they	were	alone.
‘As	I	have	told	you	again	and	again’	–	she	smiled	–	‘it	is	very	well.	So	many	hundreds	of	attendants
.	.	.	my	every	desire	anticipated	.	.	.	My	life	is	everything	I	could	have	imagined	and	more.	But	what
pleases	me	above	everything	is	that	our	son	has	returned	safely.	He	fills	me	with	such	joy.	It	seems	so
strange	to	me	to	remember	how	–	after	he	was	taken	from	us	and	Hindal	brought	him	back	–	Akbar
seemed	not	to	know	me.	I	was	so	envious	of	Maham	Anga	when	I	saw	how	he	stretched	out	his	hands
to	 her	 and	 how	 his	 smiles	 were	 for	 her,	 not	 me.	 I	 was	 so	 angry	 with	 myself,	 so	 ashamed	 of	 my
jealousy,	after	everything	we	owed	to	brave	Maham	Anga	.	.	.	But	all	that	belongs	to	the	past.	Now	I
feel	 I	 know	 every	 thought	 running	 through	 Akbar ’s	 mind,	 that	 I	 understand	 all	 his	 desires	 and
ambitions.	The	bonds	between	us	could	not	be	stronger	.	.	.	’
‘I	remember	what	you	told	me	on	the	morning	after	our	wedding	night	–	that	you	knew	you	would
bear	a	son	and	that	he	would	be	a	great	ruler	one	day	.	.	.	What	do	you	see	now	when	you	look	into	the
future?’
‘Akbar ’s	birth	was	the	last	thing	I	foresaw	clearly.	Though	as	a	girl	I	seemed	to	have	inherited	the
mystic	powers	of	my	ancestor,	they	left	me	.	.	.	Perhaps	that	is	for	the	best.	The	ability	to	see	into	the
future	may	not	always	bring	happiness	.	.	.	sometimes	it	may	be	better	not	to	know	.	.	.	’

Chapter	28
Staircase	to	Heaven
In	his	apartments	Humayun	was	studying	the	plans	for	a	new	library	that	his	architects	had	presented
to	him	earlier	that	afternoon.The	pale	clear	light	of	a	perfect	January	afternoon	played	over	drawings
of	a	building	of	red	sandstone	patterned	with	milk-white	marble	and,	on	each	of	its	four	sides,	a	tall
iwan	 –	 a	 recessed	 entrance	 arch	 –	 on	 which	 would	 be	 inscribed	 verses	 from	 Humayun’s	 favourite
Persian	poets.	One	day,	Humayun	thought,	his	library	would	eclipse	even	the	fabled	collections	of	his
Timurid	 ancestors	 in	 their	 glorious	 palaces	 beyond	 the	 Oxus.	 And	 in	 pride	 of	 place,	 carefully
preserved	 in	 an	 ivory	 box	 to	 match	 their	 still	 beautiful	 but	 yellowing	 ivory	 covers,	 would	 be	 his
father ’s	memoirs.
Babur	had	constructed	a	handsome	mosque	and	madrasa	in	Kabul	and	laid	out	several	fine	gardens,
but	had	not	had	time	to	leave	any	great	monument	behind	him	in	Hindustan.	Humayun	felt	grateful	that
he	now	had	that	opportunity.	At	forty-seven	years	old	he	was	still	in	his	prime.	As	well	as	planning	a
library,	he	had	already	commissioned	an	octagonal	floating	palace	to	be	built	on	the	Jumna	river	and
surrounded	 by	 barges	 planted	 with	 fruit	 trees	 –	 oranges,	 lemons	 and	 pomegranates	 –	 and	 sweetsmelling	flowers.
He	was	equally	pleased	that	the	observatory	he	was	installing	on	the	roof	of	the	Sher	Mandal	–	a
graceful	octagonal	pavilion	of	red	sandstone,	built	by	Sher	Shah	in	the	grounds	of	the	Purana	Qila	–
was	nearly	complete.	On	the	Sher	Mandal’s	open	roof	was	a	platform	beneath	a	small	open	dome	–
chattri	his	Hindustani	subjects	called	it	–	supported	on	slim	white	pillars	which	was	a	perfect	place
from	which	to	view	the	stars.	The	astronomical	instruments	he	had	had	specially	made	and	the	copy
he	 had	 acquired	 of	 the	 Zij-i-Gurkani	 –	 the	 astronomical	 handbook	 compiled	 by	 Timur ’s	 grandson
Ulugh	 Beg	 that	 gave	 the	 celestial	 locations	 of	 the	 stars	 –	 were	 all	 ready	 and	 in	 the	 care	 of	 a	 new
imperial	astronomer.
According	to	the	star	charts,	this	evening	–	Friday	24	January	–	would	be	an	especially	good	time
to	observe	the	ascent	of	Venus	into	the	night	sky.	Glancing	out	through	the	casement	Humayun	could
see	 that	 the	 sun	 was	 already	 starting	 to	 sink.	 Putting	 down	 the	 building	 plans	 and	 calling	 to	 his
attendants	 that	 he	 was	 going	 to	 the	 observatory	 and	 was	 not	 to	 be	 disturbed	 there,	 he	 quickly
descended	 from	 his	 apartments	 and	 went	 out	 across	 the	 flower-filled	 gardens	 to	 the	 Sher	 Mandal.
Climbing	the	steep,	straight	stone	stairway	to	its	roof,	he	found	his	astronomer	already	waiting	for
him	beneath	the	slender-columned	chattri.
Humayun	had	seldom	seen	the	sky	–	flushed	pink	and	gold	–	look	so	mesmerising.	And	there	she
was	 –	 Venus	 herself	 –	 the	 Evening	 Star	 –	 growing	 every	 second	 more	 brilliant	 in	 the	 darkening
heavens.	Moths	fluttered	around	the	wicks	in	diyas	of	oil	that	the	observatory	servants	were	lighting
as	dusk	fell,	but	Humayun	continued	to	stare	upwards,	transfixed.
It	was	the	voice	of	the	muezzin	calling	sonorously	from	the	minaret	of	the	nearby	royal	mosque
that	finally	jerked	Humayun	from	his	reverie.	He	would	far	rather	stay	here	but	it	was	Friday	–	the
day	when	he	prayed	in	public	before	his	courtiers.	Dragging	his	gaze	from	Venus,	Humayun	turned

and	made	for	the	stairs.	The	muezzin	had	almost	finished	–	he	must	hurry	.	.	.
But	as	he	stepped	down	on	to	the	first	step,	the	toe	of	his	leather	boot	caught	in	the	fur-edged	hem
of	his	long	blue	robes	and	he	was	suddenly	pitched	forward	into	nothingness.	He	put	out	his	hands	but
there	 was	 nothing	 to	 grab	 and	 he	 went	 plunging	 down	 head	 first.	 A	 sudden	 pain	 sharp	 as	 a	 blade
pierced	 his	 skull.	 Stars	 appeared	 before	 his	 eyes,	 forming	 and	 re-forming	 in	 dancing	 patterns,
drawing	him	onwards	to	become	one	with	them	and	merging	into	a	single	bright	light.	Then	all	was
black	and	still	and	peace.

‘Is	the	great	hakim	here	yet?’
‘He	is	coming,	Bairam	Khan.’	Jauhar ’s	expression	in	the	dim	light	of	Humayun’s	sick	chamber	was
as	anxious	as	the	Persian’s.	‘We	sent	for	him	at	once,	of	course,	but	unluckily	for	us	he	had	left	Delhi
a	 week	 ago	 to	 attend	 a	 family	 wedding	 in	 his	 home	 village	 a	 day’s	 ride	 from	 the	 city.	 It	 took	 my
messengers	time	to	discover	this	and	then	to	go	there.	However,	word	reached	me	just	an	hour	ago
that	he	has	been	found	and	is	being	brought	to	the	Purana	Qila.’
‘I	pray	God	that	he	is	in	time	and	that	his	skill	is	as	great	as	his	reputation	.	.	.	’	Bairam	Khan	broke
off	 as	 he	 heard	 voices	 outside	 in	 the	 corridor.	 Then	 the	 doors	 swung	 open	 to	 admit	 a	 tall,	 smoothshaven	man	in	dark	robes,	a	large,	battered	leather	bag	on	his	shoulder.
Bairam	Khan	stepped	forward.	‘I	am	His	Majesty’s	khan-i-khanan	.	I	sent	messengers	to	find	you.
You	are	the	most	respected	hakim	in	Delhi	and	our	last	hope.	Our	own	doctors	have	been	able	to	do
nothing	but	one	of	them	told	us	of	you	–	that	you	once	saved	Islam	Shah	when	he	was	close	to	death
after	a	fall	from	his	horse.’
The	hakim	nodded.
‘I	trust	that	your	past	service	to	Islam	Shah	doesn’t	make	you	unwilling	to	treat	his	successor?’
‘A	 doctor ’s	 duty	 is	 to	 save	 lives.’	 The	 hakim	 glanced	 at	 the	 bed	 where	 Humayun	 was	 lying,	 head
heavily	 bandaged,	 eyes	 closed	 and	 utterly	 still.	 ‘Before	 I	 examine	 His	 Majesty,	 tell	 me	 exactly	 what
happened	and	how	he	has	been.	I	must	know	everything.’
‘I	fear	there	is	little	to	tell.	Three	days	ago	he	fell	down	a	stone	staircase.	He	must	have	smashed	the
side	of	his	head	against	the	bottom	step	–	the	edge	is	hard	and	sharp.	His	attendants	found	him	with	his
head	covered	with	blood	and	carried	him	unconscious	to	his	apartments.	Our	hakims	 examined	 him
and	found	a	gash	and	a	huge	swelling	on	his	right	temple.	He	was	also	bleeding	from	the	mouth	and
from	his	right	ear.	Since	then	he	has	been	drifting	in	and	out	of	consciousness.	Even	in	his	more	lucid
moments,	which	are	becoming	fewer,	he	recognises	no	one	–	not	even	the	empress	or	his	son.’
The	 hakim	 nodded	 thoughtfully	 then	 moved	 towards	 the	 bed	 and	 gently	 pulled	 the	 coverlet	 back
from	Humayun,	who	made	no	movement.	Bending	his	head,	the	doctor	listened	for	a	few	moments	to
Humayun’s	heartbeat,	then	lifted	first	one	of	his	eyelids	then	the	other.	His	expression	was	grave	as,
covering	his	patient	again,	he	raised	Humayun’s	head	a	few	inches	and,	unwinding	the	bandage	of	fine
wool	around	the	top	of	his	head,	revealed	his	cut,	swollen	and	discoloured	temple.	Humayun	stirred
briefly	as	the	doctor ’s	fingers	probed	gently	but	made	no	sound.
The	hakim	was	still	examining	the	wound	when	Akbar	returned	to	the	sickroom	from	the	women’s
quarters	 where	 he	 had	 been	 comforting	 Hamida.	 He	 had	 hardly	 been	 able	 to	 bear	 the	 sight	 of	 his
father	lying	so	helpless	but	at	the	same	time	couldn’t	stay	away.	For	most	of	the	seventy-two	hours

since	the	accident	he	had	been	at	Humayun’s	bedside	hoping	in	vain	for	some	sign	of	improvement.
‘Please,’	he	whispered	to	the	hakim,	‘you	must	save	him.	Return	my	father	to	life.’
‘I	will	try,	but	his	life	is	in	God’s	hands.’
The	hakim	slid	his	bag	from	his	shoulder	and	opening	it	took	out	a	bunch	of	herbs	whose	pungent
bitter	smell	filled	the	air.	‘Build	up	the	fire,’	he	ordered	the	attendants.	‘I	need	to	infuse	these	herbs	in
boiling	water	to	make	a	poultice	to	reduce	the	swelling.’	As	the	attendants	added	more	charcoals	to
the	brazier	burning	at	the	foot	of	Humayun’s	bed,	the	hakim	took	out	a	small	brass	bowl	and	a	bundle
fastened	with	a	strap.	Undoing	it,	he	unrolled	the	bundle	to	reveal	a	selection	of	medical	instruments
from	which	he	took	a	small	sharp-bladed	knife.	‘I	will	try	bleeding	His	Majesty.	It	may	help	relieve
the	pressure	on	his	brain	that	I	believe	his	injury	has	caused.	I	need	someone	to	hold	the	cup.’
‘I	 will,’	 Akbar	 said	 at	 once.	 The	 hakim	 carefully	 took	 Humayun’s	 right	 arm	 from	 beneath	 the
coverlet,	 turned	 it	 wrist	 side	 up,	 picked	 up	 his	 knife	 and	 drawing	 the	 blade	 over	 Humayun’s	 waxen
skin	made	a	small	incision	just	beneath	the	elbow.	As	the	blood	flowed,	Akbar	carefully	caught	it	in
the	brass	bowl.	The	sight	of	the	vital	red	fluid	brought	him	hope.	It	was	proof	that	the	inert	figure	still
lived.	 His	 father	 was	 so	 strong,	 he	 thought.	 He	 had	 already	 survived	 so	 much.	 Surely	 he	 could
overcome	this	.	.	.
As	the	hakim	gestured	to	Akbar	to	remove	the	bowl	and	pressed	a	pad	of	white	cotton	against	the
cut	to	staunch	the	flow,	Humayun	murmured	something.	Akbar	put	his	head	nearer	to	his	lips,	trying
to	 catch	 what	 he	 was	 saying,	 but	 he	 couldn’t.	 ‘I	 am	 here,	 Father,	 I	 am	 here,’	 he	 said,	 hoping	 that
somehow	Humayun	would	hear	him	and	understand.	Suddenly	tears	ran	down	his	face	and	splashed
on	to	Humayun’s.
‘Majesty,	we	must	leave	the	hakim	space	to	do	his	work.’	Bairam	Khan	touched	Akbar	gently	on	the
shoulder.
‘You	 are	 right.’	 With	 one	 final	 glance	 at	 his	 father,	 Akbar	 rose	 and	 walked	 slowly	 from	 the	 sick
chamber.	 As	 the	 doors	 closed	 behind	 him,	 he	 didn’t	 see	 the	 hakim’s	 slow	 shake	 of	 the	 head	 as	 he
turned	to	Bairam	Khan	and	Jauhar.

‘Majesty,	 I	 am	 sorry	 to	 intrude	 upon	 your	 grief	 so	 soon	 after	 your	 husband’s	 death,	 but	 I	 have	 no
choice.	If	you	value	your	son’s	life	you	must	listen	to	me	.	.	.	’
Hamida	lifted	her	pale,	strained	face	from	her	hands	and	looked	towards	Bairam	Khan.	Above	the
veil	she	had	pulled	across	the	lower	portion	of	her	face	her	eyes	were	red	with	weeping.	But	at	the
suggestion	that	Akbar	might	be	in	danger,	something	in	Hamida	changed.	She	drew	herself	up	and	her
voice	was	calm	as	she	said,	‘What	do	you	mean,	Bairam	Khan?’
‘God	saw	fit	to	call	His	Majesty	your	husband	to	Paradise	when	he	had	been	back	on	the	throne	of
Hindustan	 for	 only	 six	 months.	 Although	 Akbar	 is	 his	 undisputed	 heir,	 the	 prince	 is	 only	 thirteen
years	 old.	 If	 we	 are	 not	 careful,	 ambitious	 men	 will	 try	 to	 take	 the	 throne	 from	 him.	 Men	 who	 had
been	supporters	of	Kamran	or	Askari	but	would	have	remained	loyal	to	your	husband	for	years	if	he
had	 lived	 may	 see	 his	 sudden	 death	 as	 their	 opportunity,	 even	 though	 Askari	 is	 dead	 and	 Kamran
blinded	 and	 in	 Mecca.We	 must	 also	 think	 of	 the	 rulers	 of	 subject	 kingdoms	 such	 as	 the	 smoothtongued	and	slippery	Uzad	Beg,	the	Sultan	of	Multan,	who	have	only	resubmitted	to	Moghul	authority
during	 our	 invasion	 and	 may	 try	 to	 break	 free	 again.	 And	 of	 course	 the	 news	 may	 encourage

Sekunder	Shah	to	emerge	from	the	jungles	of	Bengal	to	attempt	to	raise	armies	once	more.	There	are
also	our	external	enemies	such	as	the	Sultan	of	Gujarat	.	.	.	’
‘Bairam	Khan,	enough,’	Hamida	interrupted.	‘My	husband	chose	you	as	khan-i-khanan	because	he
trusted	you.	I	trust	you	too	–	tell	me	what	we	should	do.’
‘We	 must	 keep	 His	 Majesty’s	 death	 a	 secret	 for	 a	 few	 days	 to	 give	 us	 time	 to	 summon	 from	 the
provinces	 those	 we	 know	 to	 be	 loyal	 –	 men	 like	 Ahmed	 Khan	 from	 Agra.	 When	 enough	 of	 our
faithful	supporters	are	here	with	their	men,	we	can	have	the	khutba	read	in	the	prince’s	name	in	the
mosque	without	fear	of	challenge.	I	wish	Zahid	Beg	were	not	so	far	away.	I’ve	already	sent	riders	to
inform	 him	 of	 His	 Majesty’s	 death	 and	 to	 ask	 him	 to	 secure	 Kabul	 and	 the	 territories	 beyond	 the
Khyber	for	Akbar.’
‘But	how	can	we	keep	my	husband’s	death	from	becoming	known?’
‘By	acting	quickly	and	decisively.	Although	here	in	the	Purana	Qila	and	outside	in	the	city	people
know	 that	 the	 emperor	 has	 had	 an	 accident,	 at	 present	 only	 a	 very	 few	 –	 the	 hakims,	 Jauhar,	 your
husband’s	personal	attendants	–	know	of	his	death.	All	must	be	sworn	to	secrecy	and	as	soon	as	I	have
despatched	messengers	to	the	provinces	–	which	I	will	do	within	the	hour	–	I	will	order	that	no	one	is
to	enter	or	leave	the	fortress.	I	will	say	that	there	has	been	an	outbreak	of	disease	in	the	Purana	Qila
and	that	I	am	taking	measures	to	prevent	its	spreading	to	the	city.’
‘But	my	husband	showed	himself	to	the	people	every	day	from	the	balcony	of	the	Purana	Qila	that
overlooks	the	river.	What	will	they	say	when	he	doesn’t	appear?’
‘We	must	choose	someone	of	similar	height	and	build	to	dress	in	imperial	robes	and	impersonate
the	emperor.	From	across	the	river	no	one	will	be	able	to	distinguish	his	features.’
‘What	of	Akbar	during	these	next	days?’
‘He	 should	 stay	 within	 the	 haram.	 I	 will	 post	 extra	 guards	 –	 my	 most	 trusted	 men	 –	 around	 your
apartments.	All	his	food,	everything	he	drinks	–	even	water	–	must	be	tasted	first.’
‘You	think	the	situation	so	dangerous?’
‘Yes,	 Majesty,	 beyond	 a	 doubt.	 Remember	 how	 the	 newly	 dead	 Islam	 Shah’s	 eldest	 son	 was
murdered	before	his	mother ’s	eyes	here	in	Delhi,	scarcely	three	years	ago.’
‘Then	we	will	do	exactly	what	you	say.	It	is	what	my	husband	would	have	wished.’

That	 night,	 with	 only	 moonlight	 and	 starlight	 for	 illumination,	 Akbar	 was	 standing	 in	 the	 small
garden	 within	 the	 walls	 of	 the	 Purana	 Qila	 that	 Humayun	 had	 begun	 laying	 out	 just	 three	 months
earlier.	Behind	him	stood	Jauhar,	Bairam	Khan	and	a	few	others	who	could	be	trusted	to	witness	the
secret	 burial	 of	 Humayun,	 Moghul	 Emperor	 of	 Hindustan.	 Since	 women	 did	 not	 attend	 funerals	 –
even	 clandestine	 ones	 –	 Hamida	 and	 Gulbadan	 were	 watching	 from	 a	 casement	 above.	 Humayun’s
body,	washed	in	fragrant	water	and	shrouded	in	soft	linen,	lay	inside	a	plain	wooden	casket	beneath
the	freshly	turned	earth.The	mullah	had	just	finished	intoning	the	prayers	for	the	dead	and	Humayun’s
funeral	–	such	as	it	was	–	was	over.
Tears	 welled	 in	 Akbar ’s	 eyes	 as	 he	 thought	 of	 the	 father	 he’d	 never	 see	 again.	 He	 also	 felt
apprehensive.	A	few	days	ago	his	life	had	seemed	happy	and	secure	but	now	everything	had	changed.
He	sensed	tension	all	around	him.	Though	his	mother	and	Bairam	Khan	had	said	little,	he	knew	from
their	every	look	and	gesture	that	they	were	concerned	and	that	their	concern	was	for	him.

But	 he	 wouldn’t	 be	 afraid.	 He	 was	 of	 Timur ’s	 blood.	 Like	 his	 grandfather	 Babur	 before	 him,	 he
wouldn’t	 allow	 a	 cruel	 mischance	 to	 deprive	 him	 of	 what	 was	 his.	 Closing	 his	 eyes,	 Akbar	 began
silently	 to	 address	 his	 dead	 father.	 ‘I	 promise	 that	 you	 won’t	 lie	 long	 in	 this	 simple	 grave,	 hidden
from	the	eyes	of	men.	As	soon	as	I	am	able,	here	in	Delhi,	I	will	build	for	you	the	most	magnificent
tomb	the	world	has	ever	seen.	I,	Akbar,	the	new	Moghul	emperor,	swear	it	on	 my	 heart	 and	 on	 my
soul	.	.	.	My	beloved	father,	you	named	me	“Great”	and	great	I	will	be	–	not	only	in	memory	of	you
but	in	fulfilment	of	the	destiny	I	feel	within	me.’

Historical	Note
I	was	fortunate	that	the	story	of	Humayun	–	warrior,	star-gazer	and	second	Moghul	emperor	–	is	quite
well	documented,	better	than	that	of	his	father	Babur,	the	subject	of	the	previous	book	in	the	Empire
of	the	Moghul	quintet,	Raiders	from	the	North.The	adventures,	tragedies,	contradictions	and	eventual
triumphs	 of	 Humayun’s	 extraordinary	 life	 were	 captured	 by	 his	 half-sister	 Gulbadan,	 ‘Princess
Rosebody’,	 in	 her	 detailed	 and	 affectionate	 account	 of	 his	 life	 –	 the	 Humayunnama.	 Humayun’s
attendant	Jauhar	also	wrote	a	record	of	his	master ’s	life	–	the	Tadhkirat	al-Waqiat	–	while	Abul	Fazl,
friend	and	adviser	of	Humayun’s	son	Akbar,	chronicled	Humayun’s	reign	in	the	first	volume	of	his
Akbarnama.
Despite	the	elaborate	language	and	flowery	hyperbole	and	certain	gaps	and	inconsistencies	in	the
accounts,	 Humayun	 emerges	 as	 brave,	 ambitious,	 charismatic	 –	 and	 at	 times	 more	 than	 a	 little
eccentric.	He	indeed	believed	that	messages	were	written	in	the	stars	and	early	in	his	reign	organised
the	 administration	 of	 his	 empire	 into	 departments	 based	 on	 the	 four	 elements	 of	 earth,	 fire,	 air	 and
water.	He	dressed	in	certain	colours	on	certain	days	–	woe	betide	any	miscreant	brought	before	him
on	 Tuesdays,	 the	 day	 of	 wrath	 and	 vengeance,	 when	 Humayun	 dressed	 in	 blood-red	 robes	 –	 and
ordered	the	weaving	of	a	vast	astrological	carpet.	An	early	and	well-documented	addiction	to	opium
probably	 explains	 some	 of	 the	 excesses	 of	 his	 early	 years	 but	 they	 were	 also	 the	 product	 of	 an
enquiring,	restless,	mystical	mind.
The	 main	 military,	 political	 and	 personal	 events	 described	 in	 Brothers	 at	 War	 all	 happened.
Humayun	 was	 pushed	 out	 of	 Hindustan	 by	 Sher	 Shah,	 the	 ambitious	 son	 of	 a	 horse-trader	 from
Bengal,	and	after	one	battle	against	Sher	Shah	was	saved	by	a	young	water-seller	called	Nizam	whom
he	allowed	to	sit	on	his	throne.	Humayun’s	flight	with	Hamida	across	the	Rajasthani	desert,	Akbar ’s
birth	 in	 lonely	 Umarkot,	 and	 the	 journey	 to	 find	 sanctuary	 in	 Persia,	 reduced	 to	 eating	 horsemeat
boiled	in	a	helmet,	are	true.	So	was	Humayun’s	happiness	at	eventually	regaining	his	lost	empire	in
Hindustan.	 His	 death	 just	 six	 months	 later	 after	 falling	 down	 a	 steep	 staircase	 from	 the	 roof	 of	 his
observatory	where	he	had	been	watching	his	beloved	stars	seems	as	poignant	as	anything	a	novelist
could	invent.	It	left	his	distraught	widow	Hamida	with	a	young	son	to	protect	and	the	Moghul	Empire
again	in	the	balance.
The	 treachery	 of	 Humayun’s	 half-brothers	 –	 especially	 Kamran	 and	 Askari	 –	 indeed	 tainted	 and
dominated	 nearly	 his	 entire	 reign.	 Humayun	 really	 did	 pardon	 his	 brothers	 several	 times	 when	 his
courtiers	expected	him	to	have	them	executed	and	argued	for	it.	Humayun	did	alienate	Hindal	because
of	his	determination	to	marry	Hamida,	whom	Hindal	is	also	said	to	have	loved.	Finally	running	out	of
patience,	Humayun	did	have	Kamran	blinded	and	sent	him,	like	Askari,	on	the	haj	to	Mecca.	However,
I	 have	 sometimes	 condensed	 or	 simplified	 the	 action	 and	 omitted	 some	 incidents	 as	 well	 as
compressing	 the	 timescales.	 I	 have	 also	 obviously	 used	 the	 novelist’s	 freedom	 to	 invent	 other
incidents	while	remaining	true	to	the	overall	framework	of	Humayun’s	life.
Nearly	all	the	main	characters	in	the	book	existed	in	addition	to	his	three	half-brothers	–	his	son
Akbar,	 mother	 Maham,	 wife	 Hamida,	 half-sister	 Gulbadan,	 aunt	 Khanzada,	 Akbar ’s	 milk-mother
Maham	Anga	and	milk-brother	Adham	Khan,	Sher	Shah,	Islam	Shah,	Sekunder	Shah,	Shah	Tahmasp
of	Persia,	Bahadur	Shah	of	Gujarat,	Husain	of	Sind,	Maldeo	of	Marwar	and	Bairam	Khan.	A	very	few
like	 Baisanghar,	 Humayun’s	 grandfather,	 Ahmed	 Khan,	 his	 chief	 scout,	 Kasim,	 his	 vizier,	 and	 Baba

Yasaval	his	general	are	composite	characters.
As	part	of	my	research	for	this	book	over	a	number	of	years,	I	visited	most	of	the	places	described
–	 where	 they	 still	 exist	 –	 not	 only	 in	 India	 but	 in	 Afghanistan,	 Iran	 and	 Pakistan.	 I	 remember	 in
particular	the	red	sandstone	pavilion	–	the	Sher	Mandal	in	Delhi	on	the	banks	of	the	River	Jumna	–
where	I	descended	the	stairs	down	which	Humayun	tumbled.	I	could	picture	the	charismatic	star-gazer
hurrying	towards	those	narrow	stone	steps,	so	full	of	energy	and	confidence,	with	so	much	he	still
wanted	to	accomplish,	just	seconds	before	his	light	was	extinguished	for	ever.

Additional	Notes
Chapter	1
Humayun	came	to	the	throne	in	December	1530.
Humayun	was	born	to	Maham	in	1508.
Kamran	was	born	to	Gulrukh	during	a	period	not	covered	in	the	Baburnama,	Babur ’s	memoirs.	The
precise	date	is	unknown	but	he	was	clearly	very	close	to	Humayun	in	age.
Askari	was	born	to	Gulrukh	in	1516.	Hindal	was	born	to	Dildar	three	years	later	in	1519.	Maham	did
beg	Babur	–	even	before	Hindal	was	born	–	to	let	her	adopt	Dildar ’s	child	and	he	agreed.
Of	course	Humayun	would	have	used	the	Muslim	lunar	calendar,	but	I	have	converted	dates	into	the
conventional	solar,	Christian,	calendar	we	use	in	the	west.
Timur,	 a	 chieftain	 of	 the	 nomadic	 Barlas	 Turks,	 is	 better	 known	 in	 the	 west	 as	 Tamburlaine,	 a
corruption	of	‘Timur	the	Lame’.	Christopher	Marlowe’s	play	portrays	him	as	‘the	scourge	of	God’.
Khanzada’s	 abduction	 and	 the	 circumstances	 surrounding	 Babur ’s	 death	 are	 described	 in	 the	 first
volume	of	this	quintet,	Raiders	from	the	North.

	
Chapter	2
Humayun’s	conquest	of	Gujarat	took	place	in	1535-6.

	
Chapter	6
The	battle	of	Chausa	took	place	in	June	1539.	Jauhar	tells	the	story	of	Nizam.

	
Chapter	8
The	battle	of	Kanauj	was	fought	in	June	1540.

	
Chapter	9
Both	Humayun	and	Kamran	did	indeed	write	offering	terms	to	Sher	Shah	which	he	rejected.

	
Chapter	10
Gulbadan	described	the	flight	from	Lahore	as	‘like	the	day	of	resurrection,	people	left	their	decorated
palaces	and	their	furniture	just	as	they	were’.

	

Chapter	11
Hamida	and	Humayun	were	married	at	midday	on	21	August	1541.

	
Chapter	13
Khanzada	died	some	years	later	and	in	different	circumstances	from	those	described	here.	Akbar	was
born	in	Umarkot	on	15	October	1542.

	
Chapter	14
The	circumstances	of	Akbar	being	handed	over	to	Kamran	are	fictionalised.

	
Chapter	15
Gulbadan	described	the	vicious	mountain	tribes	with	their	propensity	for	cannibalism	as	‘ghouls	of
the	wastes’.
Humayun	crossed	into	Persia	in	December	1543.
The	once	magnificent	city	of	Kazvin	was	destroyed	by	an	earthquake.	It	lies	in	the	northwest	of	Iran,
south	of	the	Caspian	Sea.
Shah	Tahmasp’s	luscious	reception	of	Humayun	–	and	the	tensions	–	are	described	by	both	Jauhar	and
Gulbadan.	 The	 nearer	 Humayun	 drew	 to	 Kazvin,	 the	 more	 the	 journey	 resembled	 a	 triumphal
progress.	Kettledrums	boomed	as	they	rode.	In	the	towns	and	villages	people	were	ordered	to	put	on
their	best	clothes	and	cheer	the	column	as	it	passed	by.
Abul	 Fazl	 wrote	 that	 the	 Koh-i-Nur	 diamond	 reimbursed	 all	 Shah	 Tahmasp’s	 expenditure	 on
Humayun	 ‘more	 than	 four	 times	 over ’.	 The	 Koh-i-Nur	 later	 made	 its	 way	 back	 to	 India	 where	 a
French	jeweller	saw	it	in	the	collection	of	Humayun’s	great-grandson,	Shah	Jahan.	It	is	now	among
the	British	Crown	Jewels.

	
Chapter	16
The	 Safawid	 dynasty	 had	 made	 the	 Shia	 practice	 of	 Islam	 the	 state	 religion	 of	 Persia	 in	 1501.The
distinction	between	Shia	and	Sunni	derived	from	the	first	century	of	Islam	and	originally	related	to
who	 was	 Muhammad’s	 legitimate	 successor	 and	 whether	 the	 office	 should	 be	 an	 elected	 one	 or
restricted,	as	the	Shias	claimed,	to	the	descendants	of	the	prophet	through	his	cousin	and	son-in-law,
Ali.	‘Shia’	is	the	word	for	‘party’	and	comes	from	the	phrase	‘the	party	of	Ali’.	‘Sunni’	means	‘those
who	 follow	 the	 custom	 (sunna)	 of	 Muhammad’.	 By	 the	 sixteenth	 century	 further	 differences	 had
grown	between	the	two	sects,	such	as	the	nature	of	required	daily	prayer.	Humayun	did	indeed	convert
to	Shiism	temporarily.

	
Chapter	17
Kamran	did	expose	Akbar	on	the	walls	of	Kabul	to	forestall	one	of	Humayun’s	attacks	on	the	city	of

which	 historically	 there	 were	 several.	 The	 city	 changed	 hands	 between	 the	 two	 brothers	 more	 than
once.

	
Chapter	20
Sher	Shah	died	in	May	1545.

	
Chapter	21
Hindal	died	fighting	Askari	in	1551	in	somewhat	different	circumstances	from	those	described	here.

	
Chapter	23
Jauhar	describes	the	blinding	of	Kamran.	Unlike	Askari,	Kamran	made	it	to	Mecca.	He	died	in	Arabia
in	1557.

	
Chapter	24
Islam	Shah	died	in	October	1553.

	
Chapter	26
The	battle	of	Sirhind	was	fought	in	June	1555.	Humayun	entered	Delhi	at	the	end	of	July	1555.

	
Chapter	27
Sekunder	Shah	died	in	1559.

	
Chapter	28
Humayun	 died	 on	 24	 January	 1556.	 His	 vast	 sandstone	 mausoleum	 inlaid	 with	 white	 marble	 still
stands	in	Delhi,	an	architectural	gem	and	an	obvious	precursor	of	the	Taj	Mahal.

