ALEX

RUTHERFORD

Copyright	©	2011	Alex	Rutherford
The	right	of	Alex	Rutherford	to	be	identified	as	the	Author	of	the	Work	has	been	asserted	by	him	in
accordance	with	the	Copyright,	Designs	and	Patents	Act	1988.
Apart	from	any	use	permitted	under	UK	copyright	law,	this	publication	may	only	be	reproduced,	stored,
or	transmitted,	in	any	form,	or	by	any	means,	with	prior	permission	in	writing	of	the	publishers	or,	in	the
case	of	reprographic	production,	in	accordance	with	the	terms	of	licences	issued	by	the	Copyright
Licensing	Agency.
First	published	as	an	Ebook	by	Headline	Publishing	Group	in	2011
All	characters	in	this	publication	are	fictitious	and	any	resemblance	to	real	persons,	living	or	dead,	is
purely	coincidental.
Cataloguing	in	Publication	Data	is	available	from	the	British	Library
eISBN	:	9780755383276
HEADLINE	PUBLISHING	GROUP
An	Hachette	UK	Company
338	Euston	Road
London	NW1	3BH
www.headline.co.uk
www.hachette.co.uk

Contents

Title	Page
Copyright	Page
Map
Main	Characters
Epigraph
Part	I	From	Behind	the	Veil
Chapter	1	Sudden	Danger
Chapter	2	A	Severed	Head
Chapter	3	Manhood
Chapter	4	A	Gift	of	Concubines
Chapter	5	Milk	and	Blood
Part	II	Children	of	Sun,	Moon	and	Fire
Chapter	6	The	Emperor	Rides	Out
Chapter	7	Saffron	Warriors
Chapter	8	Hirabai
Chapter	9	Salim
Chapter	10	A	Wonder	of	the	World
Chapter	11	The	Pewter	Sea
Chapter	12	A	Cauldron	of	Heads
Part	III	The	Power	and	the	Glory
Chapter	13	City	of	Victory
Chapter	14	Sun	Among	Women
Part	IV	Allah	Akbar
Chapter	15	‘You	Will	Be	Emperor’
Chapter	16	Heaven	and	Hell
Chapter	17	Flaming	Torches
Chapter	18	Warrior	Prince
Chapter	19	Jewel	of	Chastity
Part	V	Great	Expectations
Chapter	20	The	Abyss
Chapter	21	‘A	Riband	in	the	Cap	of	Royalty’
Chapter	22	The	Battlements	of	Agra
Chapter	23	Pomegranate	Blossom
Chapter	24	The	Indus
Chapter	25	The	Treasurer	of	Kabul

Chapter	26	Oblivion
Part	VI	Seizer	of	the	World
Chapter	27	A	Jute	Sack
Chapter	28	Fathers	and	Sons
Chapter	29	Seizer	of	the	World
Historical	Note
Additional	Notes

Main	Characters

Akbar’s	family
Humayun,	Akbar’s	father	and	the	second	Moghul	emperor
Hamida,	Akbar’s	mother
Gulbadan,	Akbar’s	aunt	and	Humayun’s	half-sister
Kamran,	Akbar’s	uncle	and	Humayun’s	eldest	half-brother
Askari,	Akbar’s	uncle	and	Humayun’s	middle	half-brother
Hindal,	Akbar’s	uncle	and	Humayun’s	youngest	half-brother
Hirabai,	Akbar’s	wife,	princess	of	Amber	and	mother	of	Salim
Salim,	Akbar’s	eldest	son
Murad,	Akbar’s	middle	son
Daniyal,	Akbar’s	youngest	son
Man	Bai,	Salim’s	wife,	mother	of	Khusrau	and	daughter	of	Bhagwan	Das,	Raja	of	Amber
Jodh	Bai,	Salim’s	wife	and	mother	of	Khurram
Sahib	Jamal,	Salim’s	wife	and	mother	of	Parvez
Khusrau,	Salim’s	eldest	son
Parvez,	Salim’s	middle	son
Khurram,	Salim’s	youngest	son
Akbar’s	inner	circle
Bairam	Khan,	Akbar’s	guardian	and	first	khan-i-khanan,	commander-in-chief
Ahmed	Khan,	Akbar’s	chief	scout	and	later	his	khan-i-khanan
Maham	Anga,	Akbar’s	wet-nurse	(milk-mother)
Adham	Khan,	Akbar’s	milk-brother
Jauhar,	Humayun’s	steward	and	later	Akbar’s	comptroller	of	the	household
Abul	Fazl,	Akbar’s	chief	chronicler	and	confidant
Tardi	Beg,	Governor	of	Delhi
Muhammad	Beg,	a	commander	from	Badakhshan
Ali	Gul,	a	Tajik	officer
Abdul	Rahman,	Akbar’s	khan-i-khanan	after	Ahmed	Khan
Aziz	Koka,	one	of	Akbar’s	youngest	commanders
Others	at	the	Moghul	court
Atga	Khan,	Akbar’s	chief	quartermaster
Mayala,	a	favourite	concubine	of	Akbar

Anarkali,	‘Pomegranate	Blossom’,	Akbar’s	Venetian	concubine
Shaikh	Ahmad,	an	orthodox	Sunni	and	leader	of	the	ulama,	Akbar’s	senior	Islamic	spiritual	advisers
Shaikh	Mubarak,	Islamic	cleric	and	Abul	Fazl’s	father
Father	Francisco	Henriquez,	Jesuit	priest,	Persian	by	birth
Father	Antonio	Monserrate,	a	Spanish	Jesuit	priest
John	Newberry,	English	merchant
Suleiman	Beg,	Salim’s	milk-brother	and	friend
Zahed	Butt,	captain	of	Salim’s	bodyguard
Zubaida,	Salim’s	former	nursemaid	and	attendant	to	Hamida
Delhi
Hemu,	Hindu	general	who	seizes	Delhi	from	the	Moghuls
Fatehpur	Sikri
Shaikh	Salim	Chishti,	a	Sufi	mystic
Tuhin	Das,	Akbar’s	architect
Gujarat
Ibrahim	Hussain,	a	rival	member	of	the	Gujarati	royal	family
Mirza	Muqim,	a	rival	member	of	the	Gujarati	royal	family
Itimad	Khan,	a	rival	member	of	the	Gujarati	royal	family
Kabul
Saif	Khan,	Governor	of	Kabul
Ghiyas	Beg,	a	Persian	émigré	appointed	Treasurer	of	Kabul
Mehrunissa,	Ghiyas	Beg’s	daughter
Bengal
Sher	Shah,	ruler	from	Bengal	who	ejected	the	Moghuls	from	Hindustan	in	Humayun’s	reign
Islam	Shah,	Sher	Shah’s	son
Shah	Daud,	vassal	ruler	of	Bengal	in	Akbar’s	reign
Rajasthan
Rana	Udai	Singh,	ruler	of	Mewar	and	son	of	Babur’s	enemy	Rana	Sanga
Raja	Ravi	Singh,	a	Rajasthani	ruler	and	vassal	of	Akbar’s
Raja	Bhagwan	Das,	ruler	of	Amber,	brother	of	Hirabai	and	father	of	Man	Bai
Man	Singh,	son	of	Raja	Bhagwan	Das	and	nephew	of	Hirabai
The	Moghuls’	ancestors
Genghis	Khan
Timur,	known	in	the	west	as	Tamburlaine	from	a	corruption	of	Timur-i-Lang	(Timur	the	Lame)
Ulugh	Beg,	Timur’s	grandson	and	a	famous	astronomer

	
	
‘The	rush	of	arrows	and	the	clash	of	swords
Tore	the	marrow	of	elephants	and	the	entrails	of	tigers’
Akbarnama	of	Abul	Fazl

Part	I
From	Behind	the	Veil

Chapter	1

Sudden	Danger

Northwestern	India,	1556
low	 rumbling	 growl	 rose	 from	 the	 dense	 acacia	 bushes	 thirty	 yards	 away.	 Even	 without	 it	 Akbar
would	 have	 known	 the	 tiger	 was	 there.	 Its	 musky	 scent	 hung	 in	 the	 air.	 The	 beaters	 had	 done	 their
work	 well.	 While	 moonlight	 still	 silvered	 the	 hills	 in	 which	 Akbar’s	 army	 was	 encamped,	 a	 hundred
miles	 northeast	 of	 Delhi,	 they	 had	 started	 towards	 the	 small	 forest	 where	 a	 large	 male	 tiger	 had	 been
sighted.	The	village	headman	who	had	brought	word	of	it	to	the	camp,	saying	he	had	heard	that	the	young
Moghul	emperor	was	fond	of	hunting,	claimed	it	was	a	maneater	that	in	the	last	few	days	had	killed	an	old
man	labouring	in	the	fields	and	two	small	children	as	they	went	to	fetch	water.
The	 headman	 had	 left	 the	 camp	 well	 rewarded	 by	 Akbar,	 who	 could	 hardly	 contain	 his	 excitement.
Bairam	Khan,	his	guardian	and	khan-i-khanan	–	commander-in-chief	–	had	tried	to	dissuade	him	from	the
hunt,	arguing	that	with	the	Moghuls’	enemies	on	the	move	this	was	no	time	to	be	thinking	of	sport.	But	a
tiger	hunt	was	too	good	to	miss,	Akbar	had	insisted,	and	Bairam	Khan,	a	faint	smile	lightening	his	lean
scarred	face,	had	finally	agreed.
The	 beaters	 had	 employed	 the	 age-old	 hunting	 practices	 of	 the	 Moghul	 clans	 brought	 from	 their
homelands	on	the	steppes	of	Central	Asia.	 Moving	 quietly	 and	 methodically	 through	 the	 darkness,	 eight
hundred	men	had	formed	a	qamargah,	a	huge	circle	about	a	mile	across,	around	the	forest.	Then,	striking
brass	gongs	and	beating	small,	cylindrical	drums	suspended	on	thongs	round	their	necks,	they	had	begun
closing	in,	forming	a	tighter	and	tighter	human	barrier	and	driving	all	kinds	of	game	–	black	buck,	nilgai,
and	squealing	wild	pigs	–	into	the	centre.	Eventually,	as	the	light	grew	stronger,	some	of	them	had	spotted
tiger	tracks	and	sent	word	to	Akbar,	following	the	beaters	on	elephant-back.
The	beast	on	which	Akbar	was	sitting	high	in	a	jewelled	canopied	howdah	also	sensed	that	the	tiger
was	close.	It	was	swinging	its	great	head	from	side	to	side	and	its	trunk	was	coiling	in	alarm.	Behind	him
Akbar	could	hear	the	elephants	carrying	his	bodyguards	and	attendants	also	restlessly	shifting	their	great
feet.	‘Mahout,	quieten	the	beast.	Hold	it	steady,’	he	whispered	to	the	skinny,	red-turbaned	man	balanced
on	the	elephant’s	neck.	The	mahout	at	once	tapped	the	animal	behind	its	left	ear	with	his	iron	ankas,	 the
rod	he	used	to	control	it.	At	the	familiar	signal,	the	well-drilled	beast	slowly	relaxed	to	stand	motionless
again.	Taking	their	cue	from	it,	the	other	elephants	also	ceased	their	fidgeting	and	a	profound	silence	fell.
Excellent,	thought	Akbar.	This	was	the	moment	when	he	felt	most	alive.	The	blood	seemed	to	sing	in
his	veins	and	he	could	feel	his	heart	thump,	not	with	fear	but	with	exhilaration.	Though	not	yet	fourteen,	he
had	 already	 killed	 several	 tigers,	 but	 the	 battle	 of	 wits	 and	 of	 wills,	 the	 danger	 and	 unpredictability,
always	excited	him.	He	knew	that	if	the	tiger	suddenly	broke	cover,	it	would	take	him	only	an	instant	to
pluck	an	arrow	from	the	quiver	on	his	back	and	fit	it	to	his	taut-stringed,	double-curved	bow	–	the	weapon
most	 hunters	 would	 use	 against	 such	 quarry.	 But	 Akbar	 was	 curious	 to	 see	 what	 a	 musket	 could	 do,
especially	against	such	a	monster	as	this	was	reputed	to	be.	He	prided	himself	on	his	skill	with	a	musket,

A

and	despite	his	mother’s	remonstrances	had	spent	far	more	hours	practising	his	marksmanship	than	at	his
studies.	What	did	it	really	matter	if	he	couldn’t	read	when	he	could	outshoot	any	soldier	in	his	army?
The	tiger	had	stopped	growling	and	Akbar	sensed	its	amber	eyes	watching	him.	Slowly	he	rested	the
slender	engraved-steel	barrel	of	his	matchlock	musket	on	the	side	of	the	howdah.	He	had	already	loaded
the	 metal	 ball,	 trickled	 gunpowder	 from	 his	 silver-mounted	 powder	 horn	 into	 the	 pan	 and	 checked	 the
short,	thin	length	of	fuse.	His	qorchi,	his	squire,	half	crouching	close	beside	him,	was	already	holding	the
burning	taper	Akbar	would	need	to	ignite	the	fuse.
Satisfied,	 Akbar	 aimed	 his	 musket	 at	 the	 densest	 part	 of	 the	 acacia	 bushes	 where	 he	 was	 certain	 the
tiger	was	hiding,	braced	his	shoulder	to	the	ivory-inlaid	wooden	butt	and	squinted	down	the	length	of	the
long	barrel.	‘Hand	me	the	taper,’	he	whispered	to	his	qorchi,	‘and	signal	to	the	beaters.’	Clustered	in	a
semicircle	behind	the	elephants,	the	beaters	at	once	broke	into	high-pitched	yells	and	began	striking	their
gongs	and	beating	their	drums.	Moments	later,	with	an	answering	roar,	the	tiger	burst	through	the	screen	of
acacias.	Akbar	saw	a	blur	of	long	white	teeth	and	gold	and	black	fur	leaping	towards	his	elephant	as	he	lit
the	 fuse.	 There	 was	 a	 brilliant	 flash,	 then	 a	 deafening	 bang.	 The	 musket’s	 recoil	 knocked	 Akbar
backwards,	almost	somersaulting	him	out	of	the	howdah,	but	not	before	he	had	seen	the	tiger	drop	to	the
ground,	still	ten	yards	away.	As	the	smoke	cleared,	Akbar	saw	the	animal	lying	motionless	on	its	side,
blood	pouring	from	a	jagged	hole	above	its	right	eye.
Akbar	gave	a	yell	of	triumph.	Without	waiting	for	the	mahout	to	bring	his	mount	–	which	had	reacted
with	 admirable	 calmness	 to	 the	 charge	 of	 the	 tiger	 and	 the	 sharp	 crack	 of	 the	 musket	 –	 to	 its	 knees,	 he
climbed,	grinning	broadly,	over	the	side	of	the	howdah	and	dropped	lightly	to	the	ground.	He’d	made	a
fine	kill,	a	perfect	kill.	He’d	proved	to	the	doubters	who	insisted	a	musket	was	too	slow	for	killing	such
prey	that	in	the	hands	of	a	good	marksman	it	was	easily	fast	enough.	Curious	to	inspect	the	dead	beast,
Akbar	advanced	closer.	The	tiger’s	pink	tongue,	lolling	flaccidly	from	its	mouth,	was	already	attracting
green-black	 flies.	 Then	 Akbar	 noticed	 something	 else	 protruding	 through	 the	 thick	 belly	 fur.	 Teats.	 The
tiger	he’d	been	hunting	was	supposed	to	have	been	male.
The	thought	was	swiftly	followed	by	another	that	made	the	hairs	on	the	back	of	his	young	neck	lift.	With
trembling	fingers	Akbar	yanked	his	bow	from	his	shoulder	and,	reaching	behind	him,	grabbed	an	arrow.
He	 was	 still	 fitting	 it	 to	 the	 string	 when	 a	 second	 and	 massive	 tiger	 launched	 itself	 out	 of	 the	 acacias
straight	towards	him.	Somehow	Akbar	managed	to	fire	his	arrow,	and	then	time	seemed	to	stop	for	him.
The	clamour	of	warning	shouts	behind	him	faded	and	it	was	as	if	he	and	the	tiger	were	alone.	He	watched
his	arrow	very	slowly	part	the	air	in	its	flight.	The	tiger	too	looked	almost	suspended	in	its	leap,	salivaflecked	lips	drawn	back,	long	canines	prominent	and	ears	flattened	against	its	head,	like	the	image	etched
on	 the	 golden	 ring	 that	 had	 once	 belonged	 to	 Akbar’s	 great	 ancestor	 Timur	 and	 was	 now	 on	 his	 own
shaking	forefinger.
Then,	 suddenly,	 time	 rushed	 forward	 again	 and	 the	 tiger	 was	 almost	 on	 him.	 Akbar	 jumped	 aside,
closing	his	eyes	as	he	did	so	and	expecting	at	any	moment	to	feel	claws	ripping	into	his	flesh	or	smell	hot,
rancid	breath	as	sharp	teeth	sought	his	throat.	Instead	he	heard	a	skidding	thud	and	opened	his	eyes	to	see
the	tiger	crumpled	up	beside	him,	his	arrow	embedded	in	the	crimsoning	fur	of	its	throat.	For	a	moment
Akbar	stood	in	silence,	knowing	he	had	experienced	something	almost	unknown	to	him	–	fear	–	and	also
that	he	had	been	very,	very	lucky.
Still	 dazed,	 he	 caught	 the	 sound	 of	 rapidly	 approaching	 hoofbeats	 and	 turned	 to	 see	 a	 rider	 weaving
through	the	low	scrub	and	spindly	trees	towards	them.	It	must	be	a	messenger	from	the	camp,	no	doubt
sent	 by	 Bairam	 Khan	 to	 hurry	 him	 up.	 Five	 minutes	 ago	 he’d	 have	 been	 annoyed	 to	 have	 his	 sport
interrupted	 but	 now	 he	 felt	 grateful	 for	 the	 distraction	 from	 thoughts	 of	 what	 might	 have	 happened.	 The
crowd	of	beaters,	guards	and	attendants	parted	to	let	the	rider	through.	His	tall	bay	horse	was	foamy	with

sweat	 and	 he	 himself	 so	 caked	 with	 dust	 that	 his	 tunic	 of	 bright	 Moghul	 green	 looked	 almost	 brown.
Reining	 in	 before	 Akbar,	 he	 flung	 himself	 from	 the	 saddle,	 made	 the	 briefest	 of	 obeisances	 and	 said
breathlessly,	‘Majesty,	Bairam	Khan	requests	that	you	return	to	the	camp	immediately.’
‘Why?’
‘Delhi	has	fallen	to	an	advance	force	of	Hemu’s	rebels.’
Four	 hours	 later,	 as	 the	 hunting	 party	 with	 Akbar	 at	 its	 head	 passed	 through	 the	 first	 of	 the	 picket	 lines
thrown	 out	 around	 his	 camp,	 the	 sun	 was	 still	 high	 in	 the	 clear	 blue	 sky.	 Despite	 the	 tasselled	 brocade
canopy	shading	him,	Akbar’s	head	ached.	Sweat	was	sticking	his	tunic	to	his	body,	yet	he	barely	noticed
the	 discomfort	 as	 he	 pondered	 the	 disastrous	 news	 of	 the	 loss	 of	 his	 capital.	 Surely	 his	 rule	 was	 not
destined	to	be	over	almost	before	it	had	begun.
It	was	barely	ten	months	since,	on	a	makeshift	brick	throne	hastily	erected	on	a	masonry	platform	in	the
centre	of	a	Moghul	encampment,	he	had	been	proclaimed	Emperor	of	Hindustan.	Still	raw	with	grief	at	the
sudden	death	of	his	father,	the	Emperor	Humayun,	he	had	stood	awkwardly	but	proudly	beneath	a	silken
awning	to	receive	the	homage	of	Bairam	Khan	and	his	other	commanders.
His	 mother	 Hamida	 had	 only	 recently	 succeeded	 in	 convincing	 him	 just	 how	 desperate	 that	 time	 had
been.	How	Bairam	Khan,	despite	his	Persian	origins,	had	understood	better	than	anyone	that	in	the	first
hours	 and	 days	 after	 his	 father’s	 death	 the	 danger	 to	 Akbar	 came	 from	 within	 –	 from	 ambitious
commanders	 who,	 now	 the	 emperor	 was	 dead	 leaving	 only	 a	 boy	 as	 heir,	 might	 claim	 the	 throne	 for
themselves.	Most	were	men	with	no	time	for	sentiment.	Many	were	from	the	old	Moghul	clans	who	with
Akbar’s	 grandfather	 Babur	 had	 founded	 a	 new	 empire	 on	 the	 dry	 plains	 of	 Hindustan.	 The	 code	 of	 the
steppes,	had	always	been	taktya,	takhta,	‘throne	or	coffin’.	Any	who	felt	strong	enough	could	challenge
for	the	crown	and	over	the	years	many	had	done	so	and	would	do	so	again.
Akbar’s	elephant	stumbled,	jerking	him	from	his	recollections,	but	only	for	a	moment.	Staring	down	at
the	wrinkled	grey	neck	of	the	beast	with	its	sproutings	of	sparse	coarse	hair,	his	mind	soon	returned	to	its
dark	reflections.	If	the	news	was	true	and	Delhi	had	indeed	fallen,	everything	his	mother	and	Bairam	Khan
had	done	for	him	might	have	been	for	nothing.	To	win	precious	time,	they	had	concealed	Humayun’s	death
for	nearly	two	weeks,	finding	a	loyal	servant	of	similar	build	to	impersonate	the	dead	emperor.	Each	day
at	dawn,	he	had	donned	the	imperial	robes	of	green	silk	and	Humayun’s	jewelled	turban	with	its	plume	of
white	egrets’	feathers	and	appeared	as	custom	demanded	on	the	riverside	balcony	of	the	imperial	palace
in	 Delhi,	 the	 Purana	 Qila,	 to	 show	 the	 crowds	 jostling	 each	 other	 on	 the	 banks	 of	 the	 Jumna	 that	 the
Moghul	emperor	lived.
Meanwhile,	Hamida	and	her	sister-in-law	Gulbadan,	Akbar’s	aunt,	had	persuaded	the	reluctant	Akbar
that	 he	 must	 secretly	 leave	 Delhi.	 He	 could	 still	 see	 his	 mother’s	 strained	 anxious	 face	 as,	 holding	 a
flickering	oil	lamp	in	one	hand,	she	had	shaken	him	awake	with	the	other,	whispering,	‘Come	now	–	bring
nothing	with	you	–	just	come!’	Stumbling	from	his	bed,	he	had	allowed	her	to	throw	a	dark	hooded	cloak
over	him,	like	the	one	she	was	wearing.	Barely	awake	but	head	reeling	with	questions	he	had	followed
her	down	narrow	passageways	and	twisting	flights	of	stairs	through	a	part	of	the	palace	he	had	never	seen
to	emerge	into	a	small,	grubby	courtyard.	He	could	still	recall	the	acrid	smell	of	urine	–	human	or	animal,
he	couldn’t	tell.
A	 large	 palanquin	 was	 waiting,	 and	 in	 the	 shadows	 stood	 Gulbadan	 and	 about	 twenty	 soldiers	 he
recognised	as	Bairam	Khan’s	men.	‘Get	in,’	Hamida	had	whispered.
‘Why,	where	are	we	going?’	he	had	asked.
‘Your	life	is	in	danger	if	you	stay	here.	Don’t	question	me.	Just	do	it.’

‘I	don’t	want	to	run	away.	I’m	no	coward.	I’ve	already	seen	blood	and	battles	.	.	.’	he	had	protested.
Gulbadan	had	stepped	forward	and	touching	his	arm	had	added,	‘When	you	were	a	baby	and	in	danger	I
risked	my	life	for	yours.	Trust	me	now	and	do	as	your	mother	says	.	.	.’
Still	 arguing,	 he	 had	 clambered	 in,	 followed	 by	 Hamida	 and	 Gulbadan	 who	 had	 quickly	 pulled	 the
concealing	curtains	around	them.	He	could	still	recall	the	coarse	feel	of	those	hangings	–	so	different	from
the	 silks	 of	 the	 gilded	 palanquins	 usually	 used	 by	 the	 royal	 family	 –	 and	 the	 lurching	 motion	 as	 the
soldiers	had	lifted	the	supporting	poles	to	their	shoulders	and	carried	them	out	into	the	night.	Gulbadan
and	Hamida	had	sat	tense	and	silent	and	some	of	their	fear	had	at	last	communicated	itself	to	him	even
though	he	didn’t	yet	understand	what	was	going	on.	Only	when	they	were	clear	of	the	palace	and	the	city
had	his	mother	told	him	of	a	plot	to	assassinate	him	before	he	could	become	emperor.
On	 the	 outskirts	 of	 Delhi,	 more	 soldiers	 loyal	 to	 Bairam	 Khan	 had	 met	 them	 and	 escorted	 them	 to	 a
camp	fifty	miles	from	the	city.	A	week	later,	Bairam	Khan	himself	had	joined	them	with	the	main	body	of
his	 army	 and	 Akbar	 had	 been	 proclaimed	 emperor	 on	 his	 brick	 throne.	 Bairam	 Khan	 had	 then	 escorted
Akbar	in	great	ceremony	back	to	Delhi	where	in	the	Friday	mosque	the	khutba,	the	sermon,	had	been	read
in	his	name,	confirming	to	all	the	world	that	he	was	the	new	emperor.	Outmanoeuvred	before	any	of	them
had	time	to	plan	further	mischief,	all	the	Moghul	leaders	had	pledged	their	allegiance	to	him.
That	had	dealt	with	the	enemy	within	but	not	the	many	beyond	the	Moghul	frontiers,	as	this	news	about
Delhi	proved.	The	Moghuls’	position	in	Hindustan	was	indeed	precarious.	Vassals	who	had	only	recently
sworn	 loyalty	 to	 his	 father	 Humayun	 were	 trying	 to	 break	 free	 while	 enemies	 beyond	 the	 empire	 were
probing	 its	 borders.	 But	 of	 all	 these	 only	 one	 –	 Hemu	 –	 had	 emerged	 as	 a	 serious	 menace.	 He	 was	 an
unlikely	enemy,	this	reputedly	ugly	but	silver-tongued	little	man	–	a	lowborn	nobody	who	seemed	to	have
conjured	an	army	out	of	nowhere	to	challenge	Moghul	authority.	He	hadn’t	paid	too	much	attention	to	him
but	now	he	wondered	what	kind	of	man	this	Hemu	was	and	how	he	inspired	his	men.	What	lay	behind	his
success?
Akbar	was	entering	the	heart	of	the	tented	city	that	was	the	main	camp.	Perched	high	in	his	howdah	he	saw
ahead,	at	the	very	centre,	his	own	tent	–	bright	scarlet	as	befitted	the	command	tent	of	an	emperor	–	and
beside	it,	almost	as	magnificent	with	its	intricate	awnings,	Bairam	Khan’s.	His	commander-in-chief	was
standing	outside	waiting	for	him,	and	from	his	posture	Akbar	could	tell	how	impatient	he	was	for	him	to
arrive.
He	 had	 barely	 descended	 from	 his	 howdah	 before	 Bairam	 Khan	 spoke.	 ‘Majesty,	 you’ve	 heard	 the
news	–	Hemu’s	forces	have	taken	Delhi.	The	war	council	is	assembled	in	your	tent	and	already	debating
what	we	must	do.	We	must	join	them	immediately.’	Following	Bairam	Khan	inside,	Akbar	saw	his	other
commanders	and	counsellors	sitting	cross-legged	on	the	thick	red	and	blue	carpet	around	a	low,	gilded
stool	 draped	 in	 green	 velvet	 –	 the	 emperor’s	 chair.	 As	 Akbar	 took	 his	 place	 they	 rose	 and	 made	 brief
obeisance	to	him,	but	he	noticed	how,	as	they	sat	down	again,	their	eyes	quickly	turned	to	the	tall,	lean
man	standing	by	his	side.
‘Summon	 Tardi	 Beg	 so	 that	 he	 can	 tell	 the	 story	 he	 has	 already	 told	 me,’	 Bairam	 Khan	 ordered.
Moments	later,	the	Moghul	Governor	of	Delhi	was	ushered	in.	Akbar	had	known	and	liked	Tardi	Beg	all
his	life.	He	was	a	warrior	of	swaggering	confidence	from	the	mountains	north	of	Kabul,	with	a	booming
voice	to	match	the	muscular	bulk	of	his	body.	Usually	his	eyes	held	a	humorous	twinkle	but	now	the	lined,
sun-burnished	face	above	the	thick	black	beard	looked	sombre.
‘Well,	Tardi	Beg,	account	for	yourself	before	His	Majesty	and	the	council.’	Bairam	Khan’s	tone	was
cold.	‘Tell	us	how	you	abandoned	the	imperial	capital	to	a	seller	of	saltpetre	and	his	rabble.’

‘It	 was	 no	 rabble,	 but	 a	 powerful,	 well-armed	 force.	 Hemu’s	 origins	 may	 be	 humble	 but	 he	 is	 an
accomplished	 general	 who	 has	 won	 many	 battles	 for	 whoever	 would	 hire	 him.	 Now	 he	 is	 no	 longer	 a
mercenary,	but	fighting	for	himself.	He	has	raised	the	supporters	of	the	old	Lodi	dynasty	displaced	by	your
grandfather	against	us,	Majesty,	and	it	seems	that	even	the	proudest	and	most	noble	will	do	whatever	he
bids	 them.	 Our	 spies	 reported	 a	 great	 advance	 party	 swarming	 towards	 Delhi	 over	 the	 plains	 from	 the
west	and	that	Hemu’s	main	army	–	an	even	bigger	force,	with	three	hundred	war	elephants	–	was	not	many
days	behind.	There	was	nothing	we	could	do	but	withdraw	from	the	city	or	face	certain	destruction.’
Bairam	Khan’s	face	tautened	with	anger.	‘By	fleeing	Delhi	you	have	sent	a	signal	to	every	rebel	and
petty	chieftain	to	turn	against	us.	I	left	you	with	a	garrison	of	twenty	thousand	men	.	.	.’
‘It	wasn’t	enough.’
‘Then	you	should	have	sent	word	to	me	and	held	the	city	until	I	could	send	reinforcements.’
Tardi	 Beg’s	 eyes	 flashed	 and	 the	 fingers	 of	 his	 right	 hand	 sought	 the	 hilt	 of	 the	 ruby-studded	 dagger
tucked	into	his	sash.	‘Bairam	Khan,	we	have	known	each	other	many	years	and	fought	and	bled	side	by
side.	Are	you	questioning	my	loyalty?’
‘Your	conduct	is	something	for	which	you	will	answer	on	a	future	occasion,	Tardi	Beg.	The	question
now	 is	 how	 to	 regain	 what	 you	 have	 lost.	 We	 should	 .	 .	 .’	 Bairam	 Khan	 broke	 off	 as	 a	 man	 with	 a
straggling	brown	beard	entered	the	tent.	‘Ahmed	Khan,	I’m	glad	you	have	returned	safely.	What	can	you
tell	us?’
Akbar	was	always	pleased	to	see	Ahmed	Khan,	one	of	the	most	trusted	of	his	father	Humayun’s	ichkis,
his	inner	circle.	Humayun	had	appointed	him	Governor	of	Agra,	but	when	the	trouble	with	Hemu	began
Bairam	Khan	had	recalled	him	and	asked	him	to	resume	his	former	role	of	chief	scout	and	intelligence
gatherer.	The	liberal	speckling	of	dust	on	his	clothes	suggested	he	had	only	just	arrived	in	the	camp.
‘Hemu	is	advancing	on	Delhi	from	the	northwest	at	the	head	of	his	main	army	of	two	hundred	thousand
men.	If	he	maintains	his	present	pace	he	will	reach	the	city	in	about	a	week.	According	to	a	small	band	of
soldiers	my	men	intercepted	as	they	were	riding	to	join	him,	he	intends	to	proclaim	himself	emperor	there.
He	has	already	assumed	the	title	of	padishah	and	ordered	coins	to	be	minted	in	his	name.	What	is	more,
he	claims	the	Moghuls	are	alien	interlopers	in	Hindustan	ruled	by	a	mere	boy,	and	that	the	roots	of	our
dynasty	are	so	weak	they	will	be	easy	to	pluck	out.’
His	words	seemed	to	stir	the	council	into	life,	Akbar	thought,	watching	them	exchange	shocked	glances.
‘We	 must	 strike	 now	 –	 before	 Hemu	 reaches	 Delhi	 and	 consolidates	 his	 position,’	 Bairam	 Khan	 was
saying.	‘If	we	are	quick	we	can	intercept	him	before	he	gets	there.’
‘But	the	risk	is	too	great,’	objected	a	commander	from	Herat	whose	left	arm	ended	in	a	stump	where	his
hand	should	have	been.	‘If	we	are	defeated	we	will	lose	everything.	We	should	try	to	win	ourselves	time
by	negotiating	.	.	.’
‘Nonsense.	 Why	 should	 Hemu	 negotiate	 from	 a	 position	 of	 such	 strength?’	 said	 Muhammad	 Beg,	 a
thickset	and	grizzled	veteran	Badakhshani	with	a	broken	nose.	‘I	agree	with	Bairam	Khan.’
‘You	are	all	wrong,’	cut	in	Ali	Gul,	a	Tajik.	‘We	have	only	one	option	–	to	withdraw	to	Lahore	which
is	 still	 under	 Moghul	 control	 and	 regroup.	 Then,	 when	 we	 are	 strong	 enough,	 we	 can	 drive	 out	 our
enemies.’
No	 one	 is	 paying	 me	 any	 attention,	 thought	 Akbar	 as	 the	 angry,	 anxious	 clamour	 rose	 around	 him.
Bairam	Khan	was	frowning	and	looking	intently	about	him.	Akbar	knew	he	was	assessing	his	next	move.
He	was	also	sure	that	Bairam	Khan’s	strategy	was	right	–	attack	was	the	surest	defence.	Hadn’t	his	father
admitted	that	during	his	campaigns	he	had	too	often	been	prepared	to	delay	and	thus	ceded	the	initiative	to
his	 enemies?	 In	 that	 moment	 Akbar	 made	 up	 his	 mind.	 He	 would	 not	 be	 driven	 out	 of	 Hindustan	 as	 his
father	had	been.	It	was	the	Moghuls’	destiny	to	rule	Hindustan,	but,	more	than	that,	it	was	his	destiny,	and

rule	it	he	would.
Almost	before	he	realised	it,	he	was	on	his	feet,	every	eye	upon	him.	All	were	used	to	him	just	sitting
there,	their	boy	emperor	listening	to	their	advice	and	quietly	acquiescing	in	their	decisions.	‘Enough	of
this.	 How	 dare	 any	 of	 you	 even	 think	 of	 abandoning	 the	 empire?’	 he	 said	 loudly.	 ‘It’s	 not	 yours	 to
surrender.	 I	 am	 the	 rightful	 ruler	 here.	 My	 duty	 –	 our	 duty	 –	 is	 to	 win	 new	 lands,	 not	 yield	 those	 our
ancestors	 won	 to	 petty	 usurpers.	 We	 must	 attack	 Hemu	 at	 once	 and	 crush	 him	 like	 a	 melon	 beneath	 the
elephant’s	foot.	I	will	lead	the	troops	myself.’
As	Akbar	sat	down	again,	he	looked	instinctively	towards	Bairam	Khan,	whose	almost	imperceptible
nod	 told	 him	 his	 outburst	 had	 pleased	 his	 commander-in-chief.	 His	 other	 counsellors	 and	 commanders
were	on	their	feet	now	and	suddenly	the	great	tent	was	filled	with	their	voices,	this	time	all	shouting	one
thing:	 ‘Mirza	 Akbar!	 Mirza	 Akba!’	 His	 first	 reaction	 was	 relief,	 then	 pride.	 Not	 only	 were	 they
acknowledging	 him	 as	 one	 of	 the	 Amirzada	 –	 the	 blood-kin	 of	 Timur	 –	 but	 they	 were	 affirming	 their
readiness	to	follow	him	to	war	in	his	first	campaign	as	emperor.	He	had	asserted	himself	and	despite	his
youth	they	had	listened.	Command	was	sweet.
An	 hour	 later,	 Akbar	 visited	 his	 mother	 in	 the	 royal	 women’s	 quarters.	 The	 sleeping	 tents	 and
bathhouses	 were	 protected	 by	 a	 fence	 of	 tall,	 gilded	 wooden	 screens	 lashed	 together	 with	 thongs	 of
oxhide	in	which	there	was	only	one	well-guarded	entry	gate.	As	he	entered	her	tent,	he	smelled	the	sweet
spicy	scent	that	ever	since	childhood	he	had	associated	with	Hamida	–	sandalwood.	It	was	coming	from	a
silver	incense	burner	in	the	centre	of	the	floor,	from	which	a	thin	wisp	of	smoke	was	curling	upwards	to	a
vent	in	the	roof.
Hamida	was	lying	against	a	bolster	of	flowered	silk	while	Zainab	her	attendant	combed	her	long	hair,
dark	as	Akbar’s	own.	On	one	side	sat	his	aunt	Gulbadan,	frowning	with	concentration	as	she	plucked	the
strings	 of	 a	 somewhat	 battered	 round-bellied	 lute	 that	 had	 once	 belonged	 to	 Akbar’s	 great-greatgrandmother,	who	had	carried	it	strapped	to	her	back	during	the	Moghuls’	flight	from	Central	Asia.	Akbar
knew	the	story	of	that	lute	as	minutely	as	he	knew	all	the	family	history.	He	also	knew	that	his	aunt,	clever
as	she	was,	had	no	talent	for	lute-playing	and	that	that	annoyed	her,	hence	her	persistence.
On	the	other	side	of	Hamida,	embroidering	a	shirt,	was	his	wet-nurse	or	milk-mother,	Maham	Anga.	In
Moghul	 society,	 the	 bond	 between	 wet-nurse	 and	 the	 royal	 child	 she	 had	 suckled	 was	 lifelong.	 It	 also
made	 Maham	 Anga’s	 own	 son	 Adham	 Khan	 –	 just	 a	 few	 months	 older	 than	 himself	 –	 his	 milk-brother,
bound	to	him	with	ties	as	strong	as	those	of	blood.
At	the	sight	of	Akbar,	the	faces	of	all	three	women	lit	up.	His	mother	Hamida,	barely	thirty	and	slenderbodied	and	smooth-skinned	still,	jumped	up	and	hugged	him.	Gulbadan	put	down	her	lute	and	smiled.	A
little	older	than	Hamida,	tiny	lines	already	wrinkled	the	corners	of	her	tawny	eyes,	and	had	her	long	hair
not	been	hennaed,	silver	threads	would	have	run	through	it.	Maham	Anga	came	forward	to	embrace	him
warmly.	She	was	taller	than	either	Hamida	or	Gulbadan	and	handsome	in	a	big-boned,	almost	masculine
way.
Akbar	was	pleased	that	the	three	women	who	meant	most	to	him	were	here	together.	‘I	have	come	to
you	 straight	 from	 the	 war	 council.	 Hemu’s	 advance	 force	 has	 captured	 Delhi	 but	 he	 won’t	 hold	 it	 long.
Tomorrow	 I	 will	 lead	 our	 forces	 to	 intercept	 him	 and	 his	 main	 army	 before	 he	 can	 join	 his	 troops	 in
Delhi.	We	will	defeat	Hemu	and	retake	what	is	ours.’
While	he	spoke,	Hamida’s	eyes	–	amber-brown	like	his	own	–	were	fixed	on	his	face.	As	he	fell	silent
she	continued	to	regard	him	steadily.	What	was	going	through	her	mind?	he	wondered.
‘My	son,’	his	mother	said	at	last,	emotion	in	her	voice,	‘I	always	knew,	even	when	I	carried	you	in	my
belly,	that	one	day	you	would	be	a	great	warrior	and	a	great	leader.	The	realisation	that	that	time	has	come
fills	me	with	joy.	I	have	something	for	you.’	She	whispered	something	to	Zainab,	who	hurried	off.	When

she	returned	several	minutes	later	she	was	carrying	an	object	wrapped	in	green	velvet	which	she	laid	on
the	 carpet	 at	 Hamida’s	 feet.	 His	 mother	 knelt	 and	 threw	 back	 the	 velvet,	 and	 Akbar	 saw	 his	 father’s
golden	breastplate	and	eagle-hilted	sword,	Alamgir,	in	its	sapphire-studded	scabbard.
The	armour	and	the	sword	evoked	the	image	of	his	father	so	powerfully	that	for	a	moment	Akbar	closed
his	eyes	lest	his	mother	see	the	tears	in	them.	Hamida,	helped	by	Maham	Anga,	buckled	the	breastplate	on
him.	Humayun	had	been	tall	and	muscular	but	Akbar	was	already	nearly	as	broad	and	the	armour	fitted
well.	Now	Hamida	was	holding	Alamgir	out	to	him.	Slowly,	he	drew	the	blade	from	the	scabbard	and
made	a	few	tentative	cuts	through	the	air.	The	weight,	the	balance,	felt	good.
‘I	was	waiting	until	I	was	sure	you	were	ready,’	said	Hamida,	as	if	she	had	read	his	mind.	‘Now	I	see
that	you	are.	Tomorrow,	when	I	watch	you	ride	away,	I	will	feel	a	mother’s	anxiety	but	also	the	pride	of
an	empress.	May	God	go	with	you,	my	son.’

Chapter	2

A	Severed	Head

he	 horizon	 shimmered	 beneath	 the	 heat	 haze	 of	 the	 late	 afternoon	 sun	 as	 Akbar	 stood,	 shifting
nervously	 from	 foot	 to	 foot,	 on	 one	 of	 the	 few	 small	 hills	 on	 the	 otherwise	 featureless	 plains
northwest	of	Delhi.	Suddenly	he	saw	emerging	through	the	haze	a	troop	of	about	fifty	mounted	men.	As
they	approached,	he	said	to	Bairam	Khan	at	his	side,	‘That’s	Ahmed	Khan	at	their	head,	isn’t	it?’
‘I	can’t	be	sure.	Your	young	eyes	are	better	than	mine,	but	that	is	definitely	a	green	Moghul	banner	that
one	of	the	leading	riders	is	carrying.’
Soon	it	became	clear	that	it	was	indeed	Ahmed	Khan	returning	from	the	scouting	expedition	on	which
Akbar,	 on	 Bairam	 Khan’s	 advice,	 had	 despatched	 him	 three	 days	 previously	 to	 locate	 and	 confirm	 the
strength	of	Hemu’s	army.	About	a	quarter	of	an	hour	later,	the	familiar	straggle-bearded	figure	approached
them	and,	as	Akbar	remembered	him	doing	so	often	in	front	of	his	father,	briefly	prostrated	himself.
‘Rise,	Ahmed	Khan.	What	news	have	you?’
‘We	found	Hemu	and	his	main	force	without	difficulty.	They’re	encamped	at	Panipat,	only	twelve	miles
north	of	here.’	The	name	Panipat	was	both	familiar	and	a	source	of	pride	to	Akbar.	There	thirty	years	ago
his	grandfather	Babur	had	defeated	the	Lodi	Sultan	of	Delhi,	Sultan	Ibrahim,	to	found	the	Moghul	empire.
Only	eighteen	months	before,	Akbar	himself	had	ridden	through	the	battlefield,	still	littered	with	the	great
bleached	bones	of	some	of	Sultan	Ibrahim’s	war	elephants,	as	he	had	accompanied	his	father	Humayun	on
his	 victorious	 march	 to	 recapture	 Delhi	 and	 refound	 the	 empire	 he	 had	 lost	 to	 an	 ambitious	 ruler	 from
Bengal,	Sher	Shah.	Fate	had	not	been	kind	to	his	father.	After	so	many	struggles	against	Sher	Shah	and	his
own	 traitorous	 half-brothers,	 Humayun	 had	 lived	 only	 six	 months	 after	 regaining	 his	 throne.	 Now,	 it
seemed	that	it	would	be	Akbar’s	turn	to	command	a	Moghul	army	in	battle	at	Panipat.	Young	as	he	was	he
must	do	everything	to	ensure	he	lived	up	to	his	father’s	and	grandfather’s	memories.
‘How	many	men	does	Hemu	have	with	him,	Ahmed	Khan?’	he	asked.
‘We	 estimated	 more	 than	 a	 hundred	 and	 twenty	 thousand,	 at	 least	 half	 of	 them	 mounted	 and	 of	 good
quality.	And	he	also	has	around	five	hundred	war	elephants.’
‘Then	 as	 we	 expected	 he	 will	 outnumber	 us	 by	 about	 twenty	 thousand	 men.	 How	 many	 cannon	 and
muskets	does	he	possess?’
‘They’ve	fewer	cannon	than	we	anticipated,	perhaps	thirty	in	total,	many	of	them	small.	From	what	we
could	see,	most	of	the	foot	soldiers	are	equipped	with	bows	and	arrows,	not	muskets,	although	they	do	of
course	have	some	musketeers.’
‘We’ve	 got	 the	 advantage	 there	 then,	 Bairam	 Khan,	 haven’t	 we?’	 Akbar	 turned	 to	 his	 commander-inchief.	‘There’s	no	reason	we	shouldn’t	give	battle	at	Panipat,	is	there?	It	is	a	place	of	good	fortune	for	our
people.	 Wouldn’t	 fighting	 there	 give	 added	 confidence	 to	 our	 troops,	 even	 if	 we	 are	 outnumbered?’
Akbar’s	expression	was	almost	pleading.
Bairam	 Khan	 smiled	 at	 his	 young	 protégé’s	 enthusiasm.	 ‘Yes,	 Majesty,	 it	 is	 indeed	 a	 good	 site	 for	 a
battle,	and	we	can	advance	towards	it	across	these	barren	plains	quickly	and	without	fear	of	ambush.’
Before	 Akbar	 could	 reply,	 Ahmed	 Khan	 interrupted.	 ‘Your	 Majesty	 speaks	 of	 Panipat	 being	 of	 good

T

omen	for	the	Moghuls.	It	certainly	is	–	but	perhaps	not	for	Hemu.	We	heard	a	story	from	a	merchant	we
questioned	 who	 had	 been	 trading	 in	 Hemu’s	 camp.	 He	 claimed	 he	 got	 it	 straight	 from	 one	 of	 Hemu’s
personal	 attendants,	 but	 it	 seems	 to	 be	 common	 gossip	 among	 Hemu’s	 men	 because	 we	 later	 heard	 it
repeated	by	another	captive	–	a	humble	foot	soldier	whose	ragged	dress	suggested	he	was	far	from	being
a	member	of	Hemu’s	war	council.’
‘What	is	this	story?’	asked	Akbar.
‘That	a	couple	of	nights	ago	Hemu’s	own	war	elephant	–	a	huge	beast	–	was	killed	by	lightning	in	its
stable	during	a	brief	but	violent	storm.	None	of	the	other	elephants	was	even	injured.	When	Hemu	heard
the	 news	 the	 next	 morning,	 he	 confessed	 that	 he’d	 had	 a	 nightmare	 that	 same	 evening	 in	 which	 he	 had
fallen	from	his	elephant	into	a	swollen	river.	He	was	on	the	point	of	drowning	when	a	Moghul	warrior
dragged	him	to	the	bank,	put	him	in	chains	and	led	him	away	with	a	rope	around	his	neck.	Hemu	explained
this	away	to	his	followers	saying	that	in	his	family	the	reverse	of	what	was	portrayed	in	dreams	always
came	 about	 in	 life.	 Thus	 he	 would	 soon	 strike	 us	 from	 our	 high	 howdahs	 and	 lead	 us	 into	 captivity.
However,	he	seemed	clearly	worried,	and	was	later	observed	making	lavish	offerings	to	his	Hindu	gods.’
This	was	indeed	an	omen,	Akbar	thought.	But	Bairam	Khan	was	the	first	to	speak.	‘Even	if	this	rumour
isn’t	true,	its	circulation	around	Hemu’s	camp	will	lower	morale.	It	makes	me	even	more	certain	that	we
should	advance	at	once	to	Panipat.’
Two	days	later,	the	bright	orange	flames	of	cooking	fires	punctured	the	grey	half-light	of	the	hour	before
dawn	 as	 Akbar’s	 men	 grabbed	 a	 hasty	 meal	 and	 began	 to	 arm	 themselves.	 Nervously	 they	 tested	 the
sharpness	of	their	sword	blades	with	their	fingers	and	checked	and	rechecked	the	tightness	of	their	horses’
girths	whilst	muttering	prayers	for	their	safety	and	success	in	the	coming	battle.	Elsewhere,	as	agreed	by
the	 war	 council,	 small	 cannon	 were	 being	 hitched	 to	 teams	 of	 twenty-four	 oxen	 so	 that	 they	 could
accompany	the	army	as	it	advanced.	In	the	elephant	lines,	the	mahouts	 were	 feeding	 their	 charges	 with
great	 bundles	 of	 hay,	 fitting	 their	 armoured	 coats	 of	 overlapping	 steel	 plates	 and	 strapping	 the	 curved
scimitars	to	their	tusks.	The	howdahs	which	would	carry	the	troops	on	their	backs	were	being	readied	to
be	 loaded	 on	 to	 them	 once	 the	 other	 preparations	 were	 complete.	 In	 their	 tents,	 the	 medical	 men	 –	 the
hakims	–	were	laying	out	their	ointments	and	phials	of	pain-dulling	opium	and	readying	their	saws	and
cauterising	irons	essential	for	the	severe	wounds	they	knew	they	would	encounter.
Akbar	 himself	 had	 slept	 fitfully.	 Images	 of	 glory	 had	 been	 interspersed	 with	 anxiety	 not	 to	 let	 either
himself	or	his	forebears	down.	He	had	given	up	any	pretence	at	sleep	two	hours	previously.	Now	he	was
already	clad	in	his	gilded	breastplate	with	his	father’s	sword	Alamgir	slung	from	his	studded	metal	belt.
His	helmet	was	encircled	at	its	widest	point	by	a	row	of	rubies	and	a	peacock	feather	set	in	gold	waved
at	 its	 crest,	 but	 in	 practical	 contrast	 to	 this	 show	 of	 magnificence	 a	 fine	 mesh	 of	 hard	 steel	 rings	 hung
down	at	its	back	and	sides	to	protect	his	neck	in	battle.	At	Akbar’s	side	were	Bairam	Khan	and	the	broadshouldered,	 bearded	 figure	 of	 Tardi	 Beg,	 both	 also	 already	 armed	 and	 helmeted.	 Akbar	 had	 pressed
Bairam	Khan	to	allow	Tardi	Beg	to	take	his	place	in	the	battle	and	have	the	opportunity	to	prove	himself
once	more,	but	it	had	only	been	with	great	difficulty	that	he	had	persuaded	him.	Even	now	Bairam	Khan’s
tone	was	harsh	as	he	spoke.	‘Tardi	Beg,	I	trust	you	not	to	let	our	emperor	down.	It	was	his	idea	that	you
should	lead	the	right	wing.	I	had	my	reservations.’
‘You	made	that	clear	enough	at	the	war	council.	Haven’t	we	fought	side	by	side	before?	Haven’t	we
called	each	other	tugan,	brother-in-arms?	Only	God	knows	what	our	personal	fates	will	be	today.	Let	us
not	part	on	bad	terms.	You	need	not	fear.	I	will	uphold	my	honour.’	Tardi	Beg’s	usually	resonant	voice
was	quiet.

Bairam	Khan	stared	deep	into	the	eyes	of	Tardi	Beg,	who	steadily	and	unblinkingly	returned	his	gaze.
Suddenly	 Bairam	 Khan	 smiled,	 stretched	 out	 his	 arms	 and	 embraced	 the	 other	 man.	 ‘May	 God	 be	 with
you,’	he	said.	‘I	know	you	will	fight	well,	my	brother.’
‘Victory	 will	 be	 ours,’	 replied	 Tardi	 Beg,	 before	 bowing	 to	 Akbar.	 Then	 without	 another	 word	 he
turned,	 mounted	 the	 horse	 held	 ready	 for	 him	 by	 his	 groom	 and	 rode	 with	 his	 bodyguard	 towards	 his
appointed	position.
An	hour	and	a	half	later,	with	his	milk-brother	Adham	Khan	beside	him,	Akbar	was	riding	just	behind
the	 vanguard	 at	 the	 very	 centre	 of	 the	 mile-wide	 line	 of	 his	 advancing	 army.	 Both	 young	 men	 had
repeatedly	 to	 rein	 in	 their	 horses,	 which	 seemed	 as	 eager	 for	 battle	 as	 they	 were,	 for	 as	 Bairam	 Khan,
riding	 a	 short	 distance	 from	 them,	 had	 pointed	 out,	 the	 squadrons	 of	 horsemen	 on	 the	 flanks	 and	 in	 the
vanguard	 must	 not	 outdistance	 the	 teams	 of	 oxen	 pulling	 the	 small	 cannon,	 the	 majestic,	 plodding	 war
elephants	 and	 the	 ranks	 of	 archers	 marching	 behind	 them.	 Some	 of	 the	 bowmen	 had	 ragged	 clothes	 and
many	were	barefoot	but,	like	the	elephants,	they	could	still	play	a	role	in	battle	even	in	the	new	world	of
gunpowder.	Their	very	numbers	compensated	for	what	they	lacked	in	individual	firepower,	Bairam	Khan
had	told	Akbar.
The	morning	had	dawned	overcast,	with	scudding	low	clouds,	but	as	Akbar	looked	up,	a	gap	opened	in
them	 directly	 above	 him	 and	 the	 rising	 sun	 appeared,	 shining	 a	 beam	 of	 bright	 light	 on	 to	 him	 and	 his
gleaming	 armour.	 Feeling	 the	 sudden	 warmth	 of	 its	 brightness	 on	 his	 upturned	 face,	 Akbar	 shouted	 to
Bairam	Khan,	‘This	is	yet	another	favourable	omen,	isn’t	it?	Spread	the	word	to	our	men.	The	rising	sun
shines	on	me	alone	today.	Only	dark	clouds	gather	over	Hemu.	Victory	will	be	ours.	More	victories	will
follow.	Our	empire	will	eclipse	all	others	until	like	the	midday	sun	no	one	will	be	able	to	contemplate	it
for	more	than	a	moment	without	being	blinded	by	its	magnificence.’
While	Bairam	Khan	turned	to	obey,	Akbar	drew	his	father’s	sword	and	waved	it	above	his	head.	As	he
did	 so,	 the	 beat	 of	 his	 drummers	 grew	 more	 intense	 and	 the	 blare	 of	 his	 trumpets	 more	 strident,
reverberating	 inside	 his	 head.	 ‘Victory	 will	 be	 ours,’	 Akbar	 yelled	 again	 and	 heard	 the	 cry	 taken	 up	 in
ever	greater	numbers	all	along	his	lines.
Then	from	in	front	of	him	he	heard	the	answering,	undaunted	shouts	of	Hemu’s	troops.	‘Hemu,	Hemu,
Hemu	 Padishah!’	 Standing	 in	 his	 stirrups,	 Akbar	 saw	 over	 the	 heads	 and	 through	 the	 fluttering	 green
banners	of	his	vanguard	the	glinting	armour	of	Hemu’s	war	elephants,	no	more	than	a	mile	off.	He	knew
what	it	meant.	Confident	in	his	superior	numbers,	Hemu	had	scorned	to	draw	up	his	men	around	the	few
low	hillocks	on	which	Akbar’s	grandfather	Babur	had	positioned	his	troops	to	win	his	great	victory	all
those	years	ago.	Like	Akbar,	Hemu	was	staking	his	all	on	a	frontal	attack.
Excitement	rising	within	him	like	an	exploding	volcano,	Akbar	kicked	his	tall	black	horse	forward	and
galloped	 through	 the	 vanguard,	 whilst	 Adham	 Khan	 and	 his	 startled	 bodyguard	 followed	 as	 best	 they
could.	Lost	to	all	thoughts	but	that	of	conflict,	Akbar	continued	to	cry,	‘Victory	will	be	ours!’
‘Majesty,	our	right	flank	is	in	chaos,’	an	officer	gasped	out	as	he	rode	up	to	Akbar	half	an	hour	later.	His
face	was	covered	in	sweat	and	dust	and	he	had	lost	his	helmet.	His	white	horse	was	blowing	hard	and
bleeding	 from	 a	 sword	 slash	 to	 its	 rump.	 Bairam	 Khan,	 who	 had	 eventually	 succeeded	 in	 restraining
Akbar	from	his	wild	gallop	at	the	head	of	his	troops,	was	still,	like	Adham	Khan,	at	his	side.	All	three
were	 sitting	 on	 their	 horses	 in	 the	 middle	 of	 a	 circle	 of	 a	 dozen	 small	 bronze	 cannon	 which	 were	 now
being	readied	for	action	about	a	quarter	of	a	mile	back	from	the	swaying,	heaving	front	lines	of	the	battle.
Heedless	of	protocol,	Bairam	Khan	spoke	before	Akbar.	‘Has	Tardi	Beg	let	us	down?’
‘Indeed	 he	 has	 not,’	 said	 the	 officer	 indignantly.	 ‘His	 banner	 still	 flutters	 at	 the	 heart	 of	 the	 fight.

However,	though	Hemu’s	forces	appeared	to	us	to	be	evenly	distributed	across	his	advancing	battle	line,
they	were	not.	Most	of	his	best	battle-inured	war	elephants	were	concentrated	on	the	flank	opposite	Tardi
Beg,	 and	 as	 the	 lines	 neared	 each	 other	 they	 rushed	 forward	 and	 smashed	 into	 Tardi	 Beg’s	 men.	 The
bullets	of	our	musketeers	seemed	to	bounce	off	the	elephants’	steel	head	armour.	The	initial	charge	of	the
elephants	was	followed	by	a	rush	of	cavalry,	many	of	them	waving	the	banners	of	the	old	Lodi	sultans.
When	I	last	glimpsed	Tardi	Beg,	he	had	cut	his	way	into	them	at	the	head	of	his	bodyguard.	Although	hardpressed,	 they	 were	 holding	 their	 own.	 But	 elsewhere	 on	 the	 right	 our	 horsemen	 are	 falling	 back,	 some
even	abandoning	their	comrades,	throwing	down	their	weapons	and	galloping	for	the	rear.	Others,	despite
being	more	resolute,	are	being	surrounded	and	killed.’
Anxiety	gripped	Akbar	as	again,	standing	in	his	stirrups,	he	looked	in	the	direction	of	the	right	flank.
His	 cavalry	 were	 indeed	 beginning	 to	 scatter.	 ‘Bairam	 Khan,	 we	 must	 act	 quickly.	 Should	 I	 ride	 with
reinforcements?’
‘No.	That	would	only	cost	many	lives	–	perhaps	even	your	own	–	and	gain	little.	We	must	draw	Hemu’s
men	on	to	our	centre,	which	remains	strong	and	can	be	reinforced	from	the	left.’
‘Can	we	make	a	strong	point	here,	around	these	cannon?’	Akbar	asked,	brain	racing.
‘Indeed,	 Majesty.	 I	 will	 send	 orders	 to	 the	 officers	 of	 the	 foot	 archers	 to	 gather	 their	 men	 within	 the
cannon	circle.’	He	turned	to	an	officer	at	his	side.	‘Drag	as	many	baggage	wagons	as	you	can	between	the
cannon	and	overturn	them	to	provide	protection.	Order	the	soldiers	from	our	vanguard	to	fall	back	on	us
here	and	summon	as	many	from	the	left	flank	as	can	be	spared.’
Desperate	 to	 think	 of	 anything	 that	 would	 help	 rescue	 the	 situation,	 Akbar	 had	 another	 idea.	 ‘Bairam
Khan,	 should	 we	 order	 the	 survivors	 on	 the	 right	 flank	 to	 retreat	 on	 us	 here	 too?	 If	 they	 give	 the
impression	of	panic	Hemu	might	pursue	them	too	eagerly	and	expose	himself	to	our	counter-attack.’
Bairam	Khan	thought	for	a	moment,	then	nodded.	‘You	have	learned	your	military	lessons	well.	We	still
have	more	than	enough	elephants	and	horsemen	unengaged	in	our	rear	to	hit	Hemu	and	his	attackers	hard
in	the	flank.	Adham	Khan,	take	a	dozen	men	and	ride	to	tell	any	officers	you	can	find	on	the	right	flank	to
fall	back	on	us	here	in	pretended	panic.’
Adham	Khan	wheeled	his	horse	and	pulling	a	band	of	mounted	men	around	him	disappeared	into	the
mêlée.
Ten	minutes	later,	Akbar,	still	seated	on	his	black	horse	at	the	centre	of	his	circle	of	cannon,	saw	some
of	his	horsemen	riding	towards	him.	At	the	head	was	Adham	Khan.	As	if	in	panic,	he	threw	down	a	green
Moghul	banner	he	had	got	from	somewhere	and	bending	low	over	his	horse’s	neck,	kicked	it	into	a	wild
gallop.	The	other	riders	straggled	out	behind	him.	Then	Akbar	heard	musket	shots	and	saw	some	of	the
horsemen	 fall.	 To	 his	 relief,	 Adham	 Khan	 was	 not	 among	 them.	 Above	 the	 musket	 smoke	 and	 the	 gritty
dust	 that	 was	 drifting	 over	 the	 battlefield,	 he	 saw	 the	 howdahs	 of	 some	 of	 Hemu’s	 war	 elephants
approaching,	 swaying	 violently	 as	 their	 mahouts,	 sitting	 behind	 their	 ears,	 urged	 their	 mounts	 into	 an
ungainly	but	swift	trot	in	pursuit	of	Akbar’s	fleeing	men.
‘Order	the	artillerymen	to	fire	when	they	are	ready,’	Akbar	heard	Bairam	Khan	shout.	‘Musketeers,	try
to	knock	some	of	those	drivers	from	their	perches.	Archers,	ready	your	bows	to	fire	in	unison	when	I	give
the	order.’
At	each	of	the	cannon	which	could	be	brought	to	fire	towards	the	attackers,	gunners	put	lighted	tapers	to
the	firing	holes.	Six	loud	explosions	followed,	half	deafening	Akbar	and	more	acrid	white	smoke	filled
his	nose	and	obscured	his	vision.	When	it	had	cleared	a	little,	he	saw	that	five	of	Hemu’s	elephants	had
been	hit.	The	first	was	trumpeting	piteously	and	trying	to	stand	on	three	legs,	its	fourth	leg	just	a	bloody
stump	below	the	knee.	Three	others	lay	still	on	the	ground.	One	in	its	death	throes	had	rolled	on	to	the
howdah	on	its	back	and	seemed	to	have	crushed	the	occupants.

The	fifth	elephant	had	a	gash	in	its	belly	from	which	its	blue-grey	intestines	were	protruding.	As	Akbar
watched,	its	howdah	fell	from	its	back,	spilling	one	man	on	to	the	ground	but	the	howdah	itself	remained
attached	 by	 some	 leather	 straps	 to	 the	 elephant.	 Still	 containing	 at	 least	 three	 half-conscious	 archers,	 it
was	dragged	along	behind	the	beast	as	it	ran	away.	The	elephant	in	its	panic	crossed	the	path	of	some	of
its	fellows	who	were	loping	to	the	attack.	One	of	them	–	a	large	beast	with	long,	pointed,	curved	scimitars
on	its	tusks	–	crashed	into	the	wounded	elephant’s	side,	impaling	it	on	its	scimitars	before	both	animals
fell.	The	elephant	next	to	them	stumbled	over	the	trailing	howdah,	crushing	any	remaining	life	out	of	the
occupants	before	also	collapsing	head	first	to	the	ground,	shedding	its	own	howdah	and	precipitating	its
mahout	over	its	head	as	it	did	so.	More	of	Hemu’s	elephants	began	to	slow	in	their	charge,	struggling	to
avoid	their	fallen	brothers.
‘Archers,	 fire!’	 Bairam	 Khan	 yelled	 above	 the	 noise	 of	 battle.	 Almost	 immediately	 arrows	 began	 to
rain	 on	 to	 Hemu’s	 troops.	 Akbar	 saw	 several	 men	 tumble,	 arms	 flailing,	 from	 the	 howdahs.	 One	 arrow
caught	an	elephant	in	an	unprotected	part	of	its	lower	face	just	beneath	its	eye	and	it	lurched	across	the
path	of	its	fellow,	further	disrupting	the	attack.	Then	thick	smoke	from	the	second	round	of	cannon	shots
obscured	 everything	 once	 more	 and	 the	 sound	 of	 their	 discharge	 rendered	 Akbar	 wholly	 deaf	 for	 some
moments.	He	could	see	Bairam	Khan’s	mouth	moving,	shouting	orders,	but	could	not	hear	them.	However,
when	the	acrid	smoke	cleared	he	saw	what	the	orders	must	have	been.	His	archers	were	firing	one	last
volley	and	his	own	war	elephants	and	horsemen	were	riding	to	attack	Hemu’s	increasingly	disorganised
forces	in	the	flank.	He	watched	some	green-turbaned	musketeers	fire	from	the	canopied	howdah	on	one	of
his	own	elephants	and	the	mahout	fall	from	the	neck	of	one	of	Hemu’s	beasts	to	land,	arms	outspread,	in
the	dust.	The	man	twitched	convulsively	for	a	moment,	clawing	at	the	ground,	and	then	lay	still.
Elsewhere,	 Akbar	 saw	 a	 Moghul	 horseman,	 armed	 only	 with	 a	 lance,	 bravely	 charge	 one	 of	 Hemu’s
largest	war	elephants	head	on,	ignoring	the	already	bloodied	scimitars	on	its	tusks.	Tugging	on	the	reins
with	one	hand	so	that	his	horse	swerved	aside	at	the	last	moment,	with	his	other	hand	he	thrust	the	lance
deep	 between	 the	 elephant’s	 jaws	 as	 it	 raised	 its	 trunk	 to	 trumpet	 in	 anger.	 Red	 blood	 gushing	 from	 its
mouth,	the	beast	turned	and	ran	towards	the	rear.
Akbar	was	now	bursting	to	join	the	fight	and	to	exceed	the	exploits	of	Adham	Khan,	whom	he	could
still	see	slashing	with	his	sword	in	the	middle	of	the	action.	‘Bairam	Khan,	shouldn’t	we	lead	our	men
into	the	battle?’
‘No,	you	must	curb	your	impatience.	A	good	general,	and	even	more	a	good	emperor,	must	know	when
to	head	the	charge	and	when,	like	now,	to	wait	behind	to	see	its	effect	and	direct	its	follow-up.	Battles	are
won	by	the	brain	as	well	as	the	sword	that	your	milk-brother	Adham	Khan	is	wielding	so	mightily.	See
how	Hemu’s	army	is	falling	into	confusion.	Their	attack	has	lost	all	impetus.’
‘How	 can	 we	 exploit	 our	 advantage	 and	 destroy	 Hemu’s	 forces?’	 asked	 Akbar,	 his	 own	 mind	 still
devoid	of	any	idea	other	than	to	charge	directly	into	the	fray.
‘We	should	order	our	left	wing	to	move	across	our	front	and	encircle	as	many	of	our	opponents	as	they
can.	They	haven’t	seen	much	fighting	as	yet	and	should	be	fresh	and	eager.	If	we	keep	cool	heads,	with
their	help	we	will	win	a	great	victory	where	minutes	ago	we	might	have	lost	all.	It’s	often	so	in	battle.’
Akbar	nodded	and	Bairam	Khan	gave	the	command.	Soon	Akbar	could	see	movement	as	battalions	of
his	cavalry	and	groups	of	his	war	elephants	crossed	from	the	left	to	attempt	the	encirclement.	Even	as	they
did	so,	green	banners	billowing	and	trumpets	blaring,	groups	of	Hemu’s	horsemen	were	already	turning	to
flee,	some	stopping	to	pull	up	behind	comrades	who	had	lost	their	mounts.	As	Akbar	continued	to	watch,
a	 complete	 troop	 of	 Hemu’s	 war	 elephants	 numbering	 about	 twenty	 in	 total	 also	 began	 to	 retreat,	 the
archers	 and	 musketeers	 in	 their	 howdahs	 swivelling	 round	 as	 they	 did	 so	 to	 fire	 from	 the	 rear.	 Others
simply	threw	down	their	weapons	in	surrender.	However,	Akbar	could	see	that	a	little	over	half	a	mile

away	about	a	thousand	of	Hemu’s	troops	–	mostly	horsemen	–	were	fighting	stoutly	around	some	fallen
elephants,	using	the	carcasses	as	barricades	and	making	sorties	to	push	the	Moghul	attackers	back.	Victory
was	not	yet	his.
Before	Bairam	Khan	could	say	anything,	Akbar	kicked	his	horse	into	a	gallop	and	made	for	the	group.
As	he	galloped	nearer,	his	bodyguard	trailing	behind	him,	some	of	Hemu’s	men	seemed	to	recognise	him.
Led	by	an	orange-turbaned	officer	on	a	tall	white	horse,	they	rode	out	from	behind	the	protection	of	the
corpses	of	the	elephants	to	attack	him.	Akbar	did	not	attempt	to	turn	aside	but	galloped	harder	towards
them,	 blood	 singing	 in	 his	 ears.	 Moghul	 musket	 fire	 brought	 down	 some	 of	 his	 enemies	 but	 the	 officer
came	on	unscathed.
Akbar	had	by	now	outdistanced	his	bodyguard	by	at	least	fifty	yards.	Sword	extended	in	front	of	him,
he	rode	for	the	officer.	The	man	swerved	out	of	the	way	and	slashed	at	Akbar,	who	ducked	in	his	turn.	The
steel	sword	hissed	just	over	Akbar’s	head,	severing	the	peacock	plume	from	his	helmet.	Both	men	turned
their	 horses	 as	 tightly	 as	 they	 could	 and	 rode	 hard	 at	 each	 other	 again.	 This	 time,	 the	 officer’s	 sword
skidded	off	Akbar’s	gilded	breastplate,	and	Akbar	was	knocked	sideways.	He	lost	one	of	his	stirrups	and
only	just	managed	to	stay	in	the	saddle.	Hemu’s	officer	wheeled	his	rearing	horse	to	face	him	once	more.
Seemingly	 confident	 that	 he	 was	 getting	 the	 upper	 hand,	 he	 rashly	 tried	 to	 finish	 the	 fight	 at	 once,
attempting	to	decapitate	Akbar	by	aiming	a	swinging	sword	stroke	at	his	throat.
Anticipating	his	move,	Akbar	dodged	aside	at	the	last	moment,	but	the	very	tip	of	the	sword	nicked	his
throat	above	his	Adam’s	apple.	Oblivious	of	this	wound,	Akbar	thrust	his	sword	deep	into	the	officer’s
right	armpit,	which	he	had	left	exposed	as	he	lifted	his	arm	high	to	slash	wildly	at	Akbar’s	neck.	The	man
fell	from	his	white	horse	and	lay	on	the	ground,	scarlet	blood	seeping	from	his	armpit	into	the	stony	dirt.
Sweating	and	breathing	hard	but	relieved	to	be	alive,	Akbar	looked	round	and	saw	that	his	bodyguard	had
accounted	for	the	rest	of	the	men	who	had	accompanied	the	officer	on	his	courageous	but	hopeless	charge.
Ahead	 of	 him	 some	 of	 Hemu’s	 troops	 were	 kicking	 their	 horses	 and	 turning	 to	 flee	 from	 behind	 the
barricades,	while	others	were	surrendering.
Akbar	 jumped	 from	 the	 saddle	 and	 ran	 over	 to	 the	 orange-turbaned	 officer	 who	 was	 still	 alive.
Kneeling,	he	raised	him	slightly	in	his	arms.	‘You	fought	well,’	he	said.
‘I	 recognised	 you	 as	 the	 young	 Emperor	 Akbar.	 I	 wanted	 to	 revenge	 my	 master	 Hemu	 on	 you,’	 the
officer	responded,	the	words	coming	with	difficulty.
‘How	do	you	mean,	revenge	Hemu	on	me?’
The	wounded	man	drew	a	wheezing	breath	and	tried	to	speak,	but	at	first	only	blood,	not	words,	came
from	his	mouth.	Finally	he	succeeded	in	saying,	‘One	of	your	archers’	arrows	wounded	my	master	in	the
eye	just	after	we	had	vanquished	your	right	wing.	He	lies	mortally	stricken	over	there,	tended	by	the	last
of	those	who,	like	me,	formed	his	personal	guard.’
More	blood	oozed	between	the	man’s	teeth	and	dribbled	from	his	lips,	and	his	head	lolled	back.	He
was	 clearly	 dead.	 Akbar	 laid	 his	 body	 gently	 back	 on	 the	 ground.	 His	 own	 bodyguards	 were	 now
surrounding	him,	and	he	told	them,	‘See	to	it	that	this	man	receives	the	proper	funeral	rites	according	to
his	religion.	Even	if	misguided	in	his	loyalty,	he	fought	well.’
As	 he	 realised	 that	 total	 victory	 was	 his,	 a	 broad	 smile	 creased	 Akbar’s	 dirt-streaked	 face.	 He	 had
succeeded	in	his	first	test.	His	future	–	the	empire’s	future	–	was	bright.	His	next	campaigns	would	be	of
conquest	as	he	expanded	his	empire.	Akbar	could	see	Bairam	Khan	riding	towards	him	but	as	he	drew
nearer	he	saw	that	the	khan-i-khanan’s	expression	was	less	triumphant	than	he	might	have	expected.
‘Why,	 Akbar,	 did	 you	 join	 the	 fight	 when	 I	 said	 we	 should	 stay	 where	 we	 could	 direct	 the	 action?’
Bairam	Khan	began	unceremoniously.
Akbar’s	face	fell	and	he	felt	resentment	surge	within	him.	He	was	the	emperor,	even	if	Bairam	Khan

was	his	regent	and	his	commander-in-chief.	How	dare	the	man	speak	to	him	like	that,	spoiling	his	moment
of	victory	in	this,	his	first	battle	as	emperor?	His	grandfather	Babur	had	led	armies	at	his	age.	Yet	how
could	he	forget	how	much	he	owed	to	Bairam	Khan?	He	bit	back	his	anger	and	replied	simply,	‘Would
you	 rather	 have	 an	 emperor	 who	 in	 battle	 felt	 the	 chill	 of	 cowardice	 rather	 than	 the	 exhilaration	 of	 hot
blood	and	the	impulse	to	action?’
A	smile	did	now	lighten	Bairam	Khan’s	stern	features.	‘No,	Majesty,	I	dare	say	not.’
‘This	officer	told	me	before	he	died	that	Hemu	lies	wounded	over	there,	concealed	behind	the	bodies
of	some	of	his	war	elephants.	Let	us	investigate.’
Flanked	by	bodyguards	with	drawn	swords,	Bairam	Khan	and	Akbar	walked	over	to	the	corpses	of	the
elephants.	A	foul	stench	was	already	coming	from	the	body	of	one	whose	intestines	had	been	mangled	by
a	cannon	ball.	As	Bairam	Khan	and	Akbar	passed	another	it	suddenly	moved	its	head	and	lashed	its	trunk
in	 pain.	 Akbar’s	 hand	 instinctively	 went	 to	 his	 sword	 but	 then	 he	 saw	 that	 the	 animal	 was	 in	 its	 death
agonies	from	a	great	gash	in	its	neck	around	which	blue-green	flies	were	clustering.
‘Put	the	poor	beast	out	of	its	misery,’	he	commanded	one	of	his	bodyguards,	‘and	do	the	same	for	any
others	that	cling	to	life.’	As	he	gave	these	orders	Akbar	saw	that	in	the	remains	of	an	elephant’s	gilded
howdah	 a	 few	 yards	 away	 a	 young	 man	 was	 bending	 over	 the	 body	 of	 a	 small	 figure	 in	 engraved	 steel
armour	which	from	its	magnificence	could	only	belong	to	Hemu.	The	youth	was	using	a	bloodstained	cloth
to	dab	at	the	left	side	of	the	face	of	the	wounded	man,	who	was	shouting	at	him,	‘Leave	me	to	die.	I	would
rather	do	so	now	on	the	battlefield	than	in	some	Moghul	dungeon	in	a	few	days’	time.’
‘Seize	that	youth,’	ordered	Bairam	Khan.
Immediately	two	tall	bodyguards	strode	forward	and,	grabbing	his	arms,	pulled	him	backwards	from
the	body.	With	the	attendant	out	of	the	way,	Akbar	could	see	the	wounded	man	more	clearly.	The	brokenoff	shaft	of	an	arrow	jutted	from	where	his	left	eye	had	been,	and	blood	was	seeping	down	his	face.	His
agony	must	have	been	extreme,	but	he	looked	almost	relieved	when	Akbar	asked,	‘Are	you	Hemu?’
‘Of	course.	Who	else?’
‘What	have	you	to	say	to	your	rightful	emperor?’
‘That	 I	 have	 no	 rightful	 emperor	 and	 that	 I	 defy	 you,	 Moghul	 invader.’	 Hemu	 aimed	 a	 gob	 of	 bloody
spittle	towards	Akbar	but	it	fell	short.
‘Execute	him	at	once,	Majesty,’	said	Bairam	Khan.
Akbar	raised	his	sword	but	something	made	him	hesitate	to	strike	at	the	small,	bleeding	figure	before
him.	‘Wait	a	moment.	My	father	Humayun	always	taught	me	that	mercy	often	befitted	a	monarch	better	than
harsh	violence	.	.	.’
Hearing	 this,	 Hemu	 half-struggled	 to	 his	 feet	 and	 made	 towards	 Akbar,	 but	 two	 of	 Akbar’s	 guards
seized	him	at	once.	With	a	strength	that	belied	both	his	puny	frame	and	his	severe	wound,	Hemu	bucked
and	 strained	 and	 struggled	 so	 much	 that	 he	 broke	 free	 for	 an	 instant.	 Staggering	 towards	 Akbar,	 he
shouted,	‘You	blight	and	ravish	our	lands.	You	boast	of	your	family’s	descent	from	the	tyrant	Timur,	yet
you	cannot	even	be	sure	who	your	own	father	was.	I	hear	tell	your	father	prostituted	your	mother	to	his
generals	to	ensure	their	loyalty	and	that	she	–	camel-faced	whore	that	she	is	–	enjoy—’
Hemu	got	no	further.	With	one	slash	of	his	sword,	Akbar	severed	his	head.	Shaking	with	rage,	his	face
spattered	with	Hemu’s	hot	blood,	he	could	not	speak	for	some	moments,	but	then,	wiping	his	face	with	a
cloth	and	sheathing	his	sword,	he	turned	to	Bairam	Khan,	his	voice	once	more	composed.	‘You	are	right.
We	 should	 not	 be	 merciful	 to	 the	 undeserving.	 Display	 this	 creature’s	 body	 around	 the	 camp.	 Send	 his
head	to	Delhi	and	set	it	up	to	rot	in	one	of	the	public	squares	as	a	lesson	to	all	other	potential	rebels.’
As	 Akbar	 was	 turning	 away	 with	 Bairam	 Khan	 to	 head	 back	 towards	 his	 own	 camp,	 Adham	 Khan
approached.	He	had	a	bandage	round	the	knuckles	of	his	left	hand,	which	had	clearly	suffered	a	cut,	but

seemed	otherwise	unscathed.	Yet	he	too	appeared	less	elated	than	Akbar	thought	might	have	been	likely	in
this	hour	of	victory.	‘You	fought	well,	my	milk-brother.	I	was	watching	some	of	your	deeds.’
‘I	hear	you	tasted	blood	too,	killing	the	head	of	Hemu’s	bodyguard.	But	I’ve	sad	news	to	report	to	you
and	Bairam	Khan.	Tardi	Beg	is	dead.’
‘What?	.	.	.	How	did	he	die?’
‘When	you	instructed	me	to	gather	some	of	his	troops	to	feign	flight	back	towards	your	position,	I	and
my	men	fought	our	way	towards	his	command	post.	As	we	reached	it,	we	saw	from	a	distance	that	all	but
a	very	few	of	his	bodyguard	were	sprawled	on	the	ground,	dead	or	wounded.	He	himself	was	unhorsed
and	surrounded	by	a	group	of	Hemu’s	men	whom	he	was	trying	valiantly	to	fight	off.	As	we	got	nearer,
hoping	to	save	him,	we	heard	one	of	his	attackers	calling	on	him	to	surrender.	“No,”	Tardi	Beg	shouted.	“I
am	a	man	of	honour,	true	to	my	emperor.”	With	that	he	rushed	at	his	enemies	a	last	time	and	I	saw	one
spear	him	through	the	abdomen	with	a	lance.	As	he	lay	impaled,	twitching	and	clutching	his	guts,	another
of	Hemu’s	men	pulled	back	his	head	and	slit	his	throat	like	a	slaughterer	does	to	an	animal.’
‘You	died	bravely,	Tardi	Beg,	my	brother,	my	tugan.	May	your	soul	rest	tonight	in	Paradise,’	murmured
Bairam	Khan.	‘I	am	sorry	I	ever	doubted	you.’
After	a	long	pause,	Akbar	spoke	to	Bairam	Khan.	‘In	the	case	of	Tardi	Beg	it	was	good	not	to	execute
or	banish	him,	wasn’t	it?	I	was	wrong	to	contemplate	mercy	for	Hemu,	but	it	was	correct	to	extend	it	to
Tardi	Beg	to	allow	him	to	vindicate	his	honour	in	battle.	My	father	was	right,	wasn’t	he?	Mercy	has	as
much	place	in	the	armoury	of	a	great	ruler	as	severity.’
‘Yes,	 Majesty,’	 said	 Bairam	 Khan,	 and	 Akbar	 saw	 that	 a	 tear	 was	 running	 down	 his	 commander-inchief’s	face.

Chapter	3

Manhood

n	the	palace	fortress	of	Lahore,	Akbar	looked	down	from	the	marble	dais.	He	was	sitting	on	the	highbacked	throne	that	at	Bairam	Khan’s	suggestion	he	had	ordered	to	be	cast	from	melted-down	gold	coin
from	Hemu’s	treasure	chests.	The	throne	had	accompanied	Akbar	everywhere	during	his	six-month-long
imperial	 progress	 through	 Hindustan.	 The	 idea	 of	 showing	 himself	 to	 his	 people	 in	 the	 aftermath	 of	 his
triumph	had	been	his	own,	but	Bairam	Khan	had	helped	him	orchestrate	an	awesome	display	of	Moghul
power.
The	progress	had	delivered	everything	Akbar	had	hoped.	How	powerful,	how	proud,	he	had	felt	to	ride
at	its	head	on	his	favourite	black	stallion	with	the	gold-mounted	saddle	and	bridle,	wearing	his	father’s
gleaming	breastplate	and	Alamgir	at	his	side.	Next	to	him	had	been	Bairam	Khan	and	immediately	behind
them	 those	 commanders	 who	 had	 especially	 distinguished	 themselves	 in	 the	 battle	 against	 Hemu,
including	 Adham	 Khan	 his	 milk-brother.	 After	 that	 –	 keeping	 in	 time	 with	 the	 martial	 cacophony	 of
trumpets	 and	 kettledrums	 –	 had	 come	 the	 squadrons	 of	 horsemen,	 green	 pennants	 fluttering	 and	 steeltipped	 lances	 erect,	 then	 the	 archers,	 musketmen	 and	 artillerymen,	 some	 mounted	 and	 some	 on	 foot.
Behind	had	rumbled	the	wagonloads	of	booty	seized	from	Hemu’s	camp	–	sacks	of	coin,	chests	of	jewels,
bales	of	silks	–	protected	by	a	special	detachment	of	guards.
A	quarter	of	a	mile	further	behind,	so	that	the	dust	rising	from	the	road	should	not	dim	the	spectacle,
had	followed	the	swaying	glittering	trumpeting	mass	of	Akbar’s	war	elephants	in	their	steel-plate	armour,
some	 with	 blunted	 scimitars	 tied	 to	 their	 red-painted	 tusks.	 In	 battle	 those	 blades	 would	 be	 honed	 to	 a
deadly	sharpness,	but	these	were	merely	for	show.	With	the	elephants	captured	from	Hemu,	Akbar	now
had	 over	 six	 hundred.	 Next	 trundled	 the	 gun	 carriages	 and	 the	 bullock	 wagons	 bearing	 Akbar’s	 bronze
cannon,	then	the	huge	baggage	train	carrying	all	the	paraphernalia	–	tents,	cooking	pots,	food	and	fuel	–
for	the	imperial	encampment.
Often	the	crowds	jostling	for	a	sight	of	the	Moghul	procession	as	it	passed	had	been	so	numerous	that
soldiers	had	had	to	hold	them	back	with	their	spear	shafts.	Even	in	the	remote	countryside,	people	had
come	running	from	their	fields	to	view	the	spectacle	and	make	their	obeisance.	All	the	same,	Akbar	had
been	glad	when	it	was	finally	over.	It	had	been	his	particular	wish	that	it	should	end	here,	in	Lahore	–	the
city	which	two	years	ago,	on	a	balmy	February	day	in	1555,	his	father	Humayun	had	entered	in	triumph	on
his	way	to	reconquer	Hindustan.	Akbar	had	been	at	his	side	and	could	recall	everything,	from	the	gleam	of
the	 gold	 thread	 and	 pearl-encrusted	 saddlecloth	 of	 the	 elephant	 on	 which	 they	 had	 been	 riding	 to	 the
exultant	expression	on	his	father’s	face	as	he	had	turned	to	smile	at	him.
Out	of	respect	for	his	father,	he	had	ordered	every	detail	replicated	for	his	own	entrance	into	Lahore,
which	he	had	made	last	night	as	the	sky	had	crimsoned	to	the	west.	Now,	gazing	from	his	high	throne	on
the	 rows	 of	 chieftains	 prostrated	 before	 him	 in	 the	 formal	 greeting	 of	 the	 korunush,	 Akbar	 felt	 a	 deep
satisfaction.	As	news	of	the	Moghul	victory	over	Hemu	had	spread,	they	had	not	been	able	to	declare	their
allegiance	to	him	fast	enough.	Every	day	riders	had	arrived	bearing	unctuous	messages	and	extravagant
gifts	 –	 matched	 pairs	 of	 hunting	 dogs,	 doves	 with	 jewelled	 collars	 and	 feathers	 dyed	 in	 rainbow	 hues,

I

jade-hilted	 daggers,	 muskets	 with	 ivory-inlaid	 stocks,	 solid	 gold	 emerald-studded	 incense	 burners	 and
tortoiseshell	boxes	of	fragrant	frankincense	–	even	a	great	ruby	that	its	owner	ingratiatingly	explained	had
been	a	family	heirloom	for	over	five	centuries.
He	had	accepted	these	treasures	graciously	but	he	was	already	shrewd	enough	to	know	that	often	the
more	 lavish	 the	 present,	 the	 greater	 the	 treachery	 the	 giver	 had	 probably	 been	 contemplating.	 After
consulting	 Bairam	 Khan,	 Akbar	 had	 decided	 to	 summon	 these	 supposedly	 loyal	 allies	 to	 await	 him	 at
Lahore.
‘You	may	rise.’
The	sixty	or	so	men,	some	sleek	and	plump	in	robes	of	silk	and	brocade	in	every	colour	from	sapphire
blue	to	saffron	yellow,	others	–	chieftains	from	the	mountains	–	in	coarse-woven	tunics	and	trousers,	got
to	their	feet	and	waited,	hands	folded	and	heads	bowed.
‘I	 thank	 you	 for	 answering	 my	 summons	 and	 for	 your	 oaths	 of	 loyalty.	 I	 recall	 the	 oaths	 made	 to	 my
father	when	he	too	passed	through	Lahore	not	long	ago.	Indeed,	I	recognise	many	of	you.’	Akbar	allowed
his	gaze	to	roam	slowly	along	the	lines.	Bairam	Khan	had	briefed	him	well.	He	knew	that	among	these
chieftains	 were	 at	 least	 ten	 who	 had	 sworn	 allegiance	 to	 his	 father	 but	 on	 his	 death	 had	 immediately
ceased	sending	the	tribute	they	owed.	Two	had	even	made	approaches	to	Hemu.	They	must	be	wondering
how	 much	 Akbar	 knew.	 Did	 that	 pockmarked,	 pot-bellied	 chieftain	 from	 near	 Multan,	 who	 had	 just
presented	 him	 with	 a	 fine	 chestnut	 stallion	 and	 was	 now	 regarding	 the	 carpet	 beneath	 his	 feet	 so
studiously,	 suspect	 that	 in	 Akbar’s	 possession	 was	 proof	 of	 his	 treachery?	 Ahmed	 Khan’s	 men	 had
intercepted	one	of	his	officers	carrying	a	letter	to	Hemu.
On	 the	 road	 to	 Lahore,	 Akbar	 had	 spent	 many	 hours	 debating	 with	 Bairam	 Khan	 and	 his	 counsellors
how	best	to	handle	those	whose	loyalty	had	been	found	wanting.	Some	had	argued	that	in	the	days	of	his
grandfather	Babur	there	would	have	been	no	mercy.	The	guilty	would	have	been	stretched	on	the	stone	of
execution	to	be	crushed	by	the	foot	of	an	elephant	until	their	stomachs	ruptured	and	their	intestines	spilled,
or	else	flayed	alive	or	torn	apart	by	stallions.	But	yet	again	–	just	as	with	Tardi	Beg	–	Akbar	could	not
forget	the	words	his	father	had	been	so	fond	of	saying	to	him:	‘Any	man	can	be	vengeful.	Only	the	truly
great	can	be	merciful.’
Akbar	had	heard	enough	court	gossip	to	know	that	some	–	perhaps	even	his	mother	Hamida	–	believed
Humayun	 had	 sometimes	 carried	 magnanimity	 too	 far.	 Yet	 instinct	 told	 Akbar	 his	 father	 had	 often	 been
right.	The	Moghuls	would	always	be	warriors	who	would	not	hesitate	to	spill	blood	when	necessary.	But
if	they	were	to	succeed	in	Hindustan	they	must	rule	by	respect	as	well	as	fear.	Too	much	killing	led	to	too
many	blood	feuds.	Bairam	Khan,	listening	gravely	to	the	arguments	and,	as	was	his	habit,	saying	little	at
first,	had	eventually	agreed	with	him	but	had	added	a	warning.	‘Remember	this.	Know	your	enemies	and
listen	to	what	our	spies	tell	you.	If,	despite	your	attempts	at	reconciliation,	they	persist	in	their	treachery
then	wipe	them	from	the	face	of	the	earth.’
Akbar	brought	his	mind	back	to	the	present.	None	of	those	before	him	seemed	anxious	to	catch	his	eye.
It	was	time	to	frighten	them	a	little	and	he	had	prepared	his	words	with	care.	‘I	know	why	you	are	here.
You	perceive	that	the	winds	of	war	have	blown	in	my	favour.	It	was	not	luck	that	made	this	happen.	My
ancestor	 Timur	 conquered	 Hindustan	 and	 so	 gave	 the	 Moghuls	 an	 inalienable	 right	 to	 these	 lands.	 My
grandfather	Babur	asserted	that	right,	as	did	my	father	and	as	do	I.	Any	man	who	challenges	it	will	pay	a
heavy	price,	as	Hemu	discovered.’	Here	Akbar	paused	and	then,	speaking	in	a	firm,	clear	voice,	he	said,
‘Despite	your	fine	words	and	gifts,	I	know	that	many	of	you	have	been	traitors	to	me.	Perhaps,	even	now,
you	are	contemplating	treachery.	Look	at	me,	all	of	you,	so	that	I	can	see	into	your	eyes.’
Slowly,	the	assembled	chiefs	raised	their	heads.	All	looked	anxious,	even	the	ones	who	were	probably
innocent	of	any	wrong-doing.	Young	as	he	was,	Akbar	had	learned	enough	from	his	father’s	struggles	to

know	that	most	men	craved	power.	Of	those	standing	awkwardly	before	him,	some	visibly	sweating,	there
could	 be	 few	 who	 had	 not	 at	 least	 thought	 of	 defecting	 from	 the	 Moghuls	 at	 some	 point	 during	 Hemu’s
rebellion.
‘I	have	evidence	that	several	among	you	have	plotted	against	me.	At	a	single	word	from	me,	my	guards
stand	ready	to	mete	out	justice.’	He	saw	the	chieftains’	eyes	turn	to	the	green-robed,	black-turbaned	men
positioned	on	either	side	of	the	dais.	‘Since	I	rode	into	Lahore	I	have	been	asking	myself	what	I	should	do
.	.	.’	Akbar	paused.	The	pockmarked	man	had	started	to	shake.	‘But	I	am	young.	My	reign	is	young.	I	do
not	want	to	spill	more	blood,	and	so	I	have	decided	to	be	merciful.	I	will	forget	past	transgressions	and
look	to	you	–	as	I	do	to	all	in	my	empire	–	to	give	me	your	undivided	loyalty.	Do	this	and	you	will	find	me
generous.	If	you	do	not,	nothing	will	save	you.’
As	Akbar	rose,	the	chieftains	prostrated	themselves	once	more,	but	not	before	he	had	seen	the	relief	in
many	eyes.	He	felt	pleased	with	himself.	His	voice	had	rung	out	clearly	and	he	hadn’t	stumbled	over	his
words.	And	he	had	sensed	his	power.	With	a	single	gesture	he	could	have	had	any	of	them	killed	instantly.
He	 had	 known	 it	 and	 they	 had	 known	 it.	 It	 was	 exhilarating	 to	 realise	 that	 he	 could	 alter	 the	 course	 of
men’s	 lives	 and	 it	 had	 made	 him	 wish	 to	 be	 generous.	 That	 was	 why	 on	 impulse	 –	 without	 having
discussed	it	with	his	councillors	or	with	Bairam	Khan	–	he	had	decided	to	pardon	the	offenders.	He	had
seen	 Bairam	 Khan	 start	 with	 surprise	 at	 his	 words	 and	 then	 frown.	 But	 Bairam	 Khan	 didn’t	 seem	 to
understand	 how	 his	 confidence	 had	 been	 growing.	 He	 still	 treated	 him	 as	 a	 mere	 youth.	 Though	 Akbar
trusted	Bairam	Khan	above	all	others,	an	insidious	thought	had	begun	squirming	in	his	brain	–	that	perhaps
his	regent	had	become	so	enamoured	of	power	he	couldn’t	bear	to	relinquish	it	.	.	.
Akbar	was	still	musing	when	later	that	night,	returning	to	his	apartments,	he	saw	an	old	woman	waiting
outside	with	his	qorchi.	‘Majesty,	this	woman	has	been	appointed	the	khawajasara,	keeper	of	the	haram
here	in	the	palace,	and	she	wishes	to	speak	to	you,’	said	the	squire.
The	old	woman’s	raisin	eyes	were	still	bright	in	her	wrinkled	face	and	there	was	a	smile	on	her	lips.	‘I
served	your	father,	Majesty,	and	I	tended	his	concubines	when	he	was	a	young	prince,’	she	began.	Then
she	paused,	and	it	seemed	to	Akbar	that	she	was	scrutinising	him	with	some	interest.
‘Have	you	something	you	wish	to	say	to	me?’	The	night	air	seemed	hot	and	heavy,	and	Akbar	was	tired.
For	a	reason	he	couldn’t	quite	fathom,	he	felt	uneasy	under	her	penetrating	gaze.
‘Majesty,	you	now	have	many	women	in	the	haram	here,	sent	in	recent	weeks	by	chieftains	and	rulers
wishing	 to	 win	 your	 favour.	 You	 have	 a	 physique	 that	 is	 the	 envy	 of	 many	 grown	 men	 and	 admired	 by
every	woman.	I	thought	you	might	wish	me	to	send	one	of	the	girls	to	you,	or	perhaps	you	would	prefer	to
choose	one	for	yourself?’
Akbar	stared	at	her,	blushing	and	shifting	from	foot	to	foot.	It	was	a	standing	joke	of	his	milk-brother
Adham	Khan	that	although	nearly	fifteen	Akbar	hadn’t	yet	lost	his	virginity.	Plenty	of	young	women	–	even
his	mother’s	attendants	–	had	tried	to	catch	his	eye	in	recent	months.	Each	time	he	had	felt	bashful.	He
wasn’t	quite	sure	why.	Was	it	because	as	emperor	he	didn’t	wish	to	appear	inexperienced	or	foolish	in
front	of	anyone,	even	a	concubine?	Yet	time	was	moving	on.	He	had	fought	his	first	battle	as	emperor	and
was	becoming	a	man.	It	was	time	to	enjoy	a	man’s	pleasures	and	also	to	satisfy	the	curiosity	that	Adham
Khan’s	endless	smutty	jokes	and	boasts	of	his	own	sexual	prowess	had	roused	in	him.	The	khawajasara’s
eyes	were	still	fixed	on	him	and	he	sensed	that	she	too	knew	he’d	not	yet	been	with	a	woman.
‘Let	me	choose	for	you,	Majesty,’	she	said.
Akbar	hesitated,	but	with	pulses	racing	and	a	hardening	in	his	groin,	only	for	a	moment.	‘Very	well,’	he
said	in	what	he	hoped	was	a	measured,	experienced	manner.
‘Will	you	come	to	the	haram,	Majesty?’
Akbar	thought	about	all	the	eyes	and	ears	that	would	be	watching	and	listening	if	he	did.	The	haram

here	in	the	Lahore	palace	was	where	all	the	women	of	the	imperial	household	were	lodged,	including	his
mother,	his	aunt	and	his	milk-mother.	At	the	thought	of	their	amused	speculations,	however	affectionate,	he
flushed	again,	ardour	cooling.	Then	he	made	up	his	mind.	Now	was	the	time.	‘No.	Send	her	here,	to	my
apartments.’
The	 old	 woman	 padded	 briskly	 away	 down	 the	 long	 corridor,	 torchlight	 from	 sconces	 on	 the	 walls
lighting	her	way.	Perhaps	she	had	been	a	beauty	once,	maybe	even	one	of	his	father’s	concubines.	Akbar
had	 often	 heard	 that	 before	 his	 marriage	 to	 Hamida,	 whom	 he	 had	 loved	 to	 the	 exclusion	 of	 all	 others,
Humayun	had	been	a	great	lover	of	women,	with	many	concubines.
Dismissing	his	attendants,	he	waited	alone,	pacing	his	apartments	gripped	by	a	mixture	of	excitement
and	 apprehension.	 As	 the	 minutes	 passed	 his	 nervousness	 began	 to	 get	 the	 upper	 hand.	 He	 would	 send
word	to	the	haram	that	he	had	changed	his	mind,	he	decided.	He	was	just	moving	towards	the	tall	double
doors	of	polished	mulberry	when	they	opened	and	his	qorchi	 stepped	 inside.	 ‘Majesty,	 the	 girl	 is	 here.
The	keeper	of	the	haram	says	she	is	a	former	concubine	of	the	Raja	of	Talkh	who	prized	her	greatly	and
sent	her	hoping	she	would	please	you	also.	Her	name	is	Mayala.	Shall	I	send	her	in?’
Akbar	 nodded.	 A	 moment	 later	 a	 tall,	 slim	 form	 wrapped	 in	 a	 hooded	 dark	 purple	 robe	 slipped	 in
through	the	doors,	which	closed	behind	her.	The	hood	was	pulled	low	so	her	face	was	in	shadow	as	she
came	towards	him	and	knelt.	Akbar	hesitated,	then	took	her	hands	and	pulled	her	gently	to	her	feet.	She
stood	motionless	before	him	but	he	could	hear	her	soft,	rapid	breathing.	As	he	pushed	back	her	hood,	long
black	hair	gleaming	like	silk	spilled	out	and	he	caught	the	scent	of	jasmine.	She	was	still	looking	down
but	now	he	took	her	face	in	his	hands	and	raised	it.
Eyes	black	as	ebony	gazed	back	at	him	and	her	full	lips,	reddened	with	the	salve	he	had	seen	his	mother
apply,	were	smiling.	After	a	few	moments,	as	if	she	sensed	his	uncertainty,	she	gently	guided	his	hands	to
the	silver	clasps	of	her	robe	between	her	breasts.	As	he	released	them,	her	robe	fell	to	the	floor	and	lay	in
a	dark	pool	around	her.	Beneath	she	was	naked	except	for	a	golden	chain	set	with	tiny	rubies	around	her
slender	waist.	Her	hips	were	voluptuous,	her	breasts	round	and	high,	the	nipples	rimmed	with	henna.
As	 Akbar	 stood	 motionless,	 lost	 for	 words,	 she	 stepped	 back.	 Running	 her	 hands	 through	 the
magnificent	veil	of	hair	that	fell	almost	to	her	buttocks,	she	revolved	slowly	before	him.	‘I	think	you	like
me,	 Majesty,’	 she	 whispered.	 Akbar	 nodded.	 She	 stepped	 towards	 him	 and	 he	 felt	 her	 begin	 slowly,
teasingly,	to	loosen	his	own	garments	until	he	too	was	naked.	After	gazing	at	his	taut	and	muscular	body
for	a	moment,	she	smiled.	‘Come,	Majesty.	Be	my	stallion.’	Placing	her	fingers	on	his	arm	she	led	him	to
the	 bed,	 and	 when	 he	 lay	 down	 beside	 her	 she	 took	 his	 hand	 and	 guided	 it	 between	 her	 thighs.	 ‘See,
Majesty,	the	mandir	mandal,	the	moist	temple	of	love,	which	soon	you	will	enter.	This	is	what	you	must
do	.	.	.’
Six	hours	later,	Akbar	was	lying	on	his	back,	the	girl	beside	him,	both	their	bodies	beaded	with	sweat.
She	was	sleeping	now,	arms	and	legs	spread,	her	breasts	rising	and	falling	and	her	lips	half	parted.	As	he
turned	his	head	to	watch	her,	he	thought	how	strange	it	was	that	in	such	a	brief	time	his	life	had	changed
for	ever.	She	had	introduced	him	into	a	whole	new	world	of	sensual	experience	in	which	to	lose	himself.
They	had	already	made	love	three	times,	from	his	first,	tentative,	then	eager	thrustings	and	almost	instant
climax	 when,	 under	 her	 instruction,	 he	 had	 pulled	 himself	 on	 top	 of	 her,	 to	 the	 other	 more	 subtle,
imaginative	 and	 slightly	 longer-lasting	 ways	 she	 had	 begun	 to	 teach	 him,	 which	 seemed	 to	 give	 her	 as
much	sublime	pleasure	as	him.	At	the	thought,	desire	rose	within	him	again.	Reaching	out,	he	stroked	the
soft	 velvet	 curve	 of	 her	 hip.	 Sleepily	 Mayala	 opened	 her	 dark	 eyes,	 then	 smiled	 languorously.	 No	 one
would	 ever	 doubt	 his	 manhood,	 thought	 Akbar,	 young	 hips	 thrusting	 joyously	 and	 vigorously	 as	 he
mounted	her	once	more.

The	Jumna	river	curling	away	beneath	the	walls	of	the	Agra	fort	was	a	faint	gleam	in	the	light	of	the	new
moon	but	as	Akbar	walked	the	battlements	he	barely	noticed	the	beauty	of	the	night.	Over	two	years	had
passed	 since	 his	 triumphant	 progress	 through	 Hindustan	 after	 defeating	 Hemu.	 Ten	 days	 ago,	 on	 15
October,	 he	 had	 celebrated	 his	 seventeenth	 birthday	 in	 this	 great	 brick	 and	 sandstone	 fortress	 with	 its
courtyards,	fountains	and	lofty	durbar	hall.	His	decision	to	make	Agra	–	not	Delhi,	120	miles	upstream	to
the	north	–	his	capital	had	been	deliberate.	Agra	had	been	his	grandfather	Babur’s	capital	and	it	would
have	been	his	father	Humayun’s	had	death	not	robbed	him	of	it.	His	mother,	aunt	and	milk-mother	had	all
approved	his	decision,	as	had	his	commanders	and	councillors.	Only	Bairam	Khan	had	been	against	it,
insisting	that	Delhi	was	better	placed	strategically	to	deal	with	any	revolts	or	invasions.	Not	wanting	to
be	seen	to	argue	with	the	emperor	in	public,	he	had	come	to	Akbar’s	private	apartments,	but	Akbar	had
refused	to	be	swayed,	adamant	that	he	was	the	emperor	and	of	an	age	to	take	his	own	decisions.	Bairam
Khan	had	stalked	out	pale-faced	from	the	first	real	dispute	they	had	ever	had.
At	 the	 recollection,	 Akbar	 frowned.	 Matters	 hadn’t	 improved	 over	 the	 intervening	 months.	 He	 was
finding	 Bairam	 Khan	 increasingly	 irksome	 and	 interfering.	 It	 seemed	 that	 as	 he	 himself	 was	 gaining	 in
confidence	 and	 seeking	 a	 greater	 role	 in	 governing,	 Bairam	 Khan	 was	 actively	 trying	 to	 frustrate	 him.
With	 every	 rebuff	 his	 conviction	 that	 he	 must	 be	 free	 to	 take	 the	 government	 into	 his	 own	 hands	 was
growing.
So	far	he	had	kept	his	thoughts	to	himself,	conscious	of	all	Bairam	Khan	had	done	to	secure	the	fragile
boundaries	of	his	empire,	but	the	need	to	confide	in	someone	–	someone	he	could	trust	completely	–	was
growing	 overwhelming.	 Perhaps	 his	 mother	 with	 her	 astute	 mind	 would	 know	 how	 to	 advise	 him?
Descending	 the	 winding	 stone	 staircase	 from	 the	 battlements	 he	 made	 his	 way	 through	 a	 flower-filled
courtyard	 to	 the	 main	 haram	 where	 Hamida,	 as	 befitted	 the	 mother	 of	 the	 emperor,	 had	 the	 best
apartments,	with	a	balcony	projecting	out	over	the	Jumna	where	she	could	catch	the	refreshing	breezes.
Tonight,	though,	the	air	was	cool	and	he	found	her	in	her	sleeping	chamber,	which	was	lit	by	oil	lamps
and	wicks	burning	in	diyas,	saucers	of	scented	oil	placed	in	carved	niches	in	the	walls.	She	was	reading
her	favourite	book	of	Persian	poems	but	put	it	aside	when	he	entered.
‘How	 is	 it	 with	 my	 son?’	 The	 warm	 sandalwood	 scent	 of	 her	 enveloped	 him	 as	 she	 embraced	 him.
When	he	didn’t	answer,	she	stepped	back	and	looked	hard	into	his	face.	‘What	is	it?	You	look	troubled.’
‘I	am,	Mother.’
‘Sit	down	and	tell	me.’
Hamida	 listened	 intently	 as	 he	 poured	 out	 his	 pent-up	 grievances	 and	 his	 frustrations.	 When	 he	 had
finished	she	sat	for	a	moment	in	silence,	a	frown	puckering	her	still	beautiful	forehead	beneath	a	thin	gold
circlet	set	with	emeralds	and	pearls	–	one	of	his	father’s	last	gifts	to	her.	When	at	last	she	looked	at	him,
her	expression	was	sombre.
‘Even	if	some	of	your	complaints	are	justified,	how	can	you	forget	what	Bairam	Khan	has	done	for	our
family?	 Perhaps	 I	 need	 to	 remind	 you.	 After	 your	 father	 saved	 his	 life	 in	 battle,	 Bairam	 Khan	 pledged
himself	to	fighting	for	the	Moghuls.	Even	when	our	fortunes	were	bleakest	he	kept	faith	with	us,	though	he
could	 easily	 have	 returned	 to	 Persia,	 to	 the	 shah’s	 service.	 After	 your	 father’s	 death,	 as	 you	 very	 well
know,	his	determination	and	courage	saved	you	and	our	dynasty.’
‘I	know,	but	.	.	.’
Hamida	 held	 up	 her	 hand	 to	 silence	 him.	 ‘It	 is	 natural,	 now	 that	 you	 are	 becoming	 a	 man,	 that	 his
guidance	 irks	 you,	 and	 it	 is	 true	 that	 he	 can	 sometimes	 seem	 overbearing.	 But	 it’s	 far	 better	 to	 have	 an
adviser	who	does	not	scruple	to	speak	the	truth	than	one	who	drips	honeyed	agreement	with	your	every
whim.	You	must	learn	patience.	When	you	are	eighteen	will	be	the	time	to	think	of	taking	power	fully	into
your	own	hands	and	ruling	without	a	regent.	Until	then,	wait,	watch	and	learn.	It	is	only	since	the	victory

over	Hemu	that	you	have	shown	any	interest	in	government.	Before	that,	however	hard	I	and	Bairam	Khan
tried,	you	weren’t	interested.	When	there	were	council	meetings	you	knew	you	should	attend,	you	played
truant,	going	off	to	race	camels	or	hawking	with	Adham	Khan.	Even	now	you	spend	more	time	with	your
women	than	studying	the	real	needs	of	your	empire.	I	don’t	blame	you.	The	pleasures	of	the	haram	 are
sweet.	 A	 young	 man	 needs	 to	 satisfy	 his	 desires	 and	 it	 must	 be	 flattering	 to	 have	 so	 many	 women
competing	to	fulfil	your	every	wish.	But	ask	yourself	whether	you	are	truly	ready	to	take	full	control	or
whether	it	is	just	the	arrogance	and	impetuosity	of	youth	speaking.’
‘I	am	ready	.	.	.’
‘No,	 don’t	 interrupt.	 Listen.	 That	 is	 exactly	 what	 I	 meant	 about	 too	 much	 haste.	 And	 perhaps	 your
impatience	–	your	lack	of	concentration	–	is	why	you	still	cannot	read.	Every	tutor	we	appointed	to	teach
you	gave	up	in	despair.	Bairam	Khan	himself	tried	to	instruct	you	but	you	wouldn’t	attend.	Your	father	and
his	 father	 before	 him	 were	 scholars	 as	 well	 as	 warriors.	 A	 good	 ruler	 should	 be	 in	 command	 of
everything,	including	himself.’
‘That’s	unfair.’	Why	had	she	changed	the	subject?	How	many	times	had	he	tried	to	explain	to	her	that,
whenever	 he	 looked	 at	 a	 page,	 the	 words	 seemed	 to	 move	 about,	 becoming	 such	 a	 jumble	 he	 couldn’t
make	sense	of	them?	But	this	was	something	his	mother,	a	great	reader	herself,	couldn’t	seem	to	grasp.	He
rose	to	his	feet.	His	conversation	with	Hamida	had	not	gone	as	he	had	intended.	The	sooner	it	was	ended
the	better.	He	had	expected	her	unquestioning	support	and	instead	she	had	first	attacked,	then	side-tracked
him.	‘Thank	you	for	your	advice,’	he	said	stiffly.
‘Akbar,	don’t	be	offended.	I	spoke	only	for	your	own	good.	You	will	be	a	great	emperor	and	I	am	so
proud	of	you.	You	excel	with	every	weapon.	There	is	no	better	archer,	rider,	wrestler	or	swordsman	than
you.	You	are	fearless,	open-hearted	and	generous	in	spirit.	You	have	the	ability	to	make	your	people	love
you.	But	you	must	learn	to	be	patient	and	tread	carefully	with	those	closer	to	you	who	do	not	immediately
bow	 to	 your	 will.	 And	 above	 all,	 remember	 whom	 you	 have	 to	 thank	 for	 so	 much	 of	 the	 good	 that	 has
come	to	you.’
Akbar	stood	silent	and	straight-backed	as	she	got	up	and	kissed	his	forehead.	Dismay	that	she	thought
him	 heedless	 and	 ungrateful	 mingled	 with	 anger	 that,	 like	 Bairam	 Khan,	 she	 too	 should	 treat	 him	 like	 a
thoughtless,	pleasure-loving	youth,	grabbing	for	power	he	didn’t	yet	fully	comprehend,	never	mind	merit.
Flinging	 open	 the	 doors	 himself,	 he	 strode	 quickly	 back	 to	 his	 own	 apartments.	 He	 shouldn’t	 resent	 his
mother’s	words	but	he	couldn’t	help	it.	Why	didn’t	she	understand?	She	had	let	him	down.
He	was	still	brooding	when,	a	little	later,	his	qorchi	entered.	‘What	is	it?’
‘Maham	Anga	asks	that	you	visit	her.’
What	 did	 his	 milk-mother	 want?	 a	 surly-faced	 Akbar	 wondered	 as	 he	 approached	 the	 silverleafcovered	doors	leading	to	her	apartments.	Perhaps	Hamida	had	asked	Maham	Anga	to	join	her	in	urging
patience	and	moderation	on	him.	If	so,	their	meeting	would	be	short	–	he	didn’t	need	another	lecture.	But
Maham	Anga’s	face	as	she	greeted	him	showed	only	affection	and	concern.
‘These	 past	 weeks	 I’ve	 noticed	 you’ve	 looked	 troubled,	 and	 my	 attendants	 tell	 me	 that	 earlier	 this
evening	you	left	your	mother’s	apartments	abruptly,	as	if	in	anger.	Akbar,	what	is	wrong?’	Her	clear,	hazel
eyes	 looked	 into	 his	 and	 her	 voice	 was	 as	 softly	 coaxing	 as	 when	 he’d	 been	 a	 child.	 She	 had	 always
listened	to	him,	always	understood	.	.	.	He	found	himself	pouring	out	his	grievances	anew.	She	listened
attentively	and	without	interrupting,	just	occasionally	nodding	her	head.	When	at	last	he	fell	silent,	Maham
Anga’s	first	question	was,	‘What	did	your	mother	say	when	you	told	her	this?’
‘Just	to	be	patient.’
‘She	is	right,	of	course.	It	isn’t	wise	to	act	precipitately	and	you	still	have	much	to	learn.’	His	milkmother	was	going	to	agree	with	his	mother,	thought	Akbar.	But	then	Mahan	Anga	continued,	‘That	is	why	I

wished	to	talk	to	you.	I	too	have	been	growing	anxious.	I	see	that	you	are	becoming	ready	to	rule	and	that
Bairam	Khan	–	great	man	though	he	is	–	does	not	wish	to	acknowledge	it.’
‘He	doesn’t	wish	to	give	up	his	power.	Since	my	father’s	death	he’s	been	emperor	in	all	but	name	.	.	.’
The	 words	 came	 rushing	 out.	 ‘Now	 he	 feels	 his	 power	 slipping	 from	 him.	 He	 resents	 it	 when	 I	 assert
myself,	like	when	I	decided	to	move	my	capital	here,	to	Agra.’
‘Perhaps	 he	 does	 think	 of	 himself	 as	 emperor.	 I	 know	 he	 makes	 appointments	 to	 imperial	 posts	 from
among	 his	 followers	 without	 securing	 your	 permission.	 What	 is	 more,	 I	 hear,’	 she	 said,	 dropping	 her
voice	as	she	went	on,	‘he	has	recently	been	exercising	even	more	of	an	emperor’s	privileges.	Akbar,	there
is	something	you	should	know,	but	first	you	must	promise	to	tell	no	one	that	this	information	came	from
me.’
‘Of	course.	What	did	you	mean	about	Bairam	Khan	and	an	emperor’s	privileges?’
‘I	 am	 told	 he	 has	 been	 enriching	 himself	 from	 the	 imperial	 treasuries.	 In	 particular	 that	 he	 took	 a
valuable	diamond	necklace	with	a	jewelled	peacock	for	its	clasp	from	booty	found	in	Hemu’s	camp	after
your	 great	 victory	 at	 Panipat.	 Hemu’s	 vizier	 had	 listed	 it	 in	 his	 ledgers	 as	 among	 his	 master’s	 greatest
treasures	but	none	of	your	officials	could	find	it.	As	a	result,	some	soldiers	who	were	supposed	to	have
been	guarding	the	chests	of	booty	were	flogged	for	their	negligence.’
‘And	you	are	certain	that	Bairam	Khan	took	it?’
‘Yes.	At	first	I	didn’t	believe	the	stories	–	unfounded	rumours	always	abound	at	court,	and	in	particular
in	the	haram	where	sometimes	there	is	little	to	do	but	gossip.	But	several	weeks	ago	your	milk-brother
said	 he	 had	 a	 story	 that	 would	 amuse	 me.	 He	 told	 me	 of	 a	 concubine	 who	 until	 recently	 had	 been	 in
Bairam	Khan’s	haram	and	had	seen	this	necklace	with	her	own	eyes	–	indeed	she	had	worn	it.	It	seems
that	Bairam	Khan	likes	his	favourite	of	the	moment	to	wear	it	when	naked	in	his	presence.	My	son	didn’t
realise	the	significance	of	his	story	–	he	just	thought	I’d	laugh	to	hear	about	Bairam	Khan’s	habits.	I	said
nothing	and	he	has	no	idea	I	recognised	the	necklace	from	his	description.’
‘I	can’t	believe	Bairam	Khan	would	do	such	a	thing.’
‘Perhaps	he	doesn’t	see	it	as	theft.	Perhaps	he	thought	it	was	his	right.	After	all,	he	has	been	regent	for
four	years,	and	power	does	strange	things	to	people,	Akbar.’
‘But	why	take	the	necklace	in	secret?	Why	let	others	suffer?’
‘A	good	question.’
Akbar	thought	for	a	moment.	Maham	Anga	had	no	reason	to	lie.	She	had	only	mentioned	the	story	after
hearing	of	his	concern.	Bairam	Khan	was	clearly	becoming	addicted	to	his	power	and	the	perquisites	it
brought.	His	mind	was	made	up.	‘Maham	Anga,	what	you	have	said	convinces	me	even	more	that	I	must
break	his	hold	over	me.’
‘In	 the	 time	 of	 your	 grandfather	 and	 father,	 a	 man	 would	 have	 paid	 with	 his	 life	 for	 deceiving	 the
emperor.’
‘What?’	Akbar	stared	at	her	aghast.	‘No.	There	is	no	question	of	that.	I	owe	Bairam	Khan	everything
and	 I	 would	 still	 trust	 him	 with	 my	 life.	 I	 do	 not	 even	 begrudge	 him	 the	 diamond	 necklace,	 however
splendid.	But	I	must	be	rid	of	his	power	over	me.	I	must	rule	myself.’
Maham	Anga	seemed	to	reflect	for	a	moment.	‘Well	then	.	.	.	When	your	father	wished	to	be	rid	of	your
traitorous	 uncles	 he	 sent	 them	 on	 the	 pilgrimage	 to	 Mecca.	 Bairam	 Khan	 is	 in	 Delhi	 at	 the	 moment
inspecting	the	defences,	isn’t	he?	Send	a	letter	to	him	there.	Tell	him	how	much	you	value	his	devotion	to
your	interests	but	say	that	you	fear	he	has	been	exhausting	himself	in	the	service	of	the	empire.	Say	that
you	wish	him	to	make	the	haj	so	that	his	mind	and	body	may	be	refreshed	and	he	may	pray	for	the	security
and	prosperity	of	the	empire	he	has	done	so	much	to	establish.	You	are	the	emperor.	He	must	obey.’
Akbar	leaned	back	against	a	bolster	of	dark	orange	silk	and	pondered.	Maham	Anga’s	suggestion	for

getting	 rid	 of	 Bairam	 Khan	 was	 a	 good	 one.	 It	 would	 take	 him	 well	 over	 a	 year	 to	 complete	 the
pilgrimage.	He	would	have	to	travel	to	the	coast	of	Gujarat,	to	the	pilgrim	port	of	Cambay,	and	there	take
ship	to	Arabia.	At	the	other	end,	he	would	face	a	long	overland	journey	through	the	desert	to	Mecca.	By
the	 time	 Bairam	 Khan	 eventually	 returned,	 Akbar	 would	 have	 taken	 control	 of	 every	 aspect	 of	 the
government.	He	would	be	able	to	send	his	mentor	into	comfortable	retirement	on	some	rich	estates	that	he
would	find	for	him.
But	at	the	same	time,	another	part	of	Akbar’s	brain	told	him	such	a	plan	was	dishonourable.	He	owed	it
to	Bairam	Khan	to	ride	to	Delhi	and	tell	him	face	to	face	how	he	felt.	Yet	he	had	already	tried	that	a	dozen
times.	On	each	occasion,	Bairam	Khan	had	turned	the	conversation,	leaving	him	outmanoeuvred.	If	he	had
his	mother’s	support	in	confronting	him,	it	might	be	different,	but	Hamida	had	made	her	feelings	clear	.	.	.
wait,	wait,	wait	.	.	.	Perhaps	it	was	time	to	show	her	as	well	as	Bairam	Khan	that	he	had	come	of	age,	that
he	could	think	and	act	for	himself.
‘Maham	Anga,	be	my	scribe	and	write	to	Bairam	Khan	just	as	you	said.	But	be	sure	to	add	also	that	I
will	always	honour	him	.	.	.	that	he	has	been	like	a	father	to	me.’
‘Of	course.’	Akbar	watched	Maham	Anga	go	to	a	low,	brass-inlaid	rosewood	table	on	which	stood	a
jade	inkpot	and	a	quill	and	sit	down	cross-legged	before	it.	Within	moments,	candlelight	flickering	over
her	strong,	handsome	features,	she	was	penning	the	letter	he	hoped	would	set	him	free.	He	knew	he	could
trust	her	to	get	the	words	right.

Chapter	4

A	Gift	of	Concubines

ow	could	you	have	been	so	unthinking	and	ungrateful	towards	Bairam	Khan!’	Hamida	seized	Akbar
by	the	shoulders.	‘Who	put	you	up	to	this?’
‘No	one.’	He	had	no	intention	of	revealing	Maham	Anga’s	role.	She	had	only	had	his	interests	at
heart,	and	anyway	it	had	been	his	decision	and	his	alone.	For	a	moment	Akbar	thought	Hamida	was	going
to	slap	his	face.	Never	had	he	seen	her	so	angry.
‘You	couldn’t	even	wait	to	tell	him	on	his	return	from	Delhi,	which	wouldn’t	have	been	long.	Worse,
you	 didn’t	 have	 the	 courage	 to	 tell	 me	 but	 went	 off	 hunting	 and	 left	 me	 to	 find	 out	 from	 a	 letter	 from
Bairam	Khan	himself!’
Akbar	flushed	at	the	truth	of	her	words.	Immediately	after	affixing	his	seal	to	the	letter	and	despatching
his	messenger	to	Delhi	he	had	set	off	on	a	four-day	tiger-hunting	expedition.	If	he	was	honest,	his	decision
had	had	far	more	to	do	with	his	reluctance	to	face	his	mother	than	any	desire	for	the	thrill	of	the	sport.	He
had	been	intending	to	tell	her	immediately	on	his	return	.	.	.	had	even	practised	the	words	in	his	head.	But
it	seemed	he	had	miscalculated	the	speed	with	which	a	messenger	could	travel	between	Agra	and	Delhi.
Hamida	had	been	waiting	for	him	in	his	apartments.
‘What	did	Bairam	Khan	write?’
‘That	without	warning	or	explanation	you	had	ordered	him	on	the	haj	and	that	he	regretted	he	had	been
unable	to	say	farewell	in	person.	I	immediately	wrote	urging	him	to	return	to	court.	My	messenger	reached
him	while	he	was	still	only	a	few	days’	ride	beyond	Delhi.	This	was	his	reply,	listen.’	Voice	shaking	with
emotion,	 she	 read:	 ‘“You	 are	 very	 gracious,	 Majesty,	 to	 ask	 me	 to	 return	 but	 I	 cannot.	 Your	 son,	 the
emperor,	has	seen	fit	to	order	me	on	the	haj.	Just	as	I	was	ever	loyal	to	your	husband,	who	saved	my	life
in	 battle,	 so	 I	 must	 be	 to	 your	 son.	 May	 God	 bless	 your	 house	 and	 may	 it	 rise	 to	 yet	 greater	 glory	 in
Hindustan.”	Bairam	Khan	was	the	best	friend,	the	best	adviser	you	had,	Akbar.	Instead	of	being	grateful,
you	have	rejected	and	insulted	him,	unceremoniously	dismissing	him	as	if	he	were	a	negligent	groom.’
‘I	will	always	be	grateful	to	him,	but	he	doesn’t	understand	that	I	am	ready	to	rule	–	and	nor	do	you.
When	he	returns	he	will	see	how	well	I	have	succeeded	and	I	will	give	him	an	honourable	place	at	my
court.’	Akbar	spoke	firmly,	even	though	his	own	doubts	–	unexpressed	to	anyone	–	about	the	dimissal	of
Bairam	Khan	and	the	way	he	had	done	it	were	welling	inside	him,	however	much	he	tried	to	ignore	them.
Had	he	been	wrong?	Perhaps	for	the	first	time	in	his	life	he	began	to	query	one	of	his	decisions	as	his
mother	continued	to	rebuke	him.
‘You	have	so	much	to	learn.	What	makes	you	think	a	proud	man	like	Bairam	Khan	would	risk	further
humiliation	at	your	hands?	He	will	not	return	to	us,	and	that	will	be	your	loss.’
But	even	while	Hamida	was	still	speaking,	Akbar	saw	Maham	Anga’s	face	before	him.	She	was	one	of
his	most	trusted	confidants,	and	she	had	agreed	with	Bairam	Khan’s	dismissal	.	.	.	He	must	not	allow	his
mother	 to	 weaken	 his	 resolve.	 If	 he	 recalled	 Bairam	 Khan	 he	 would	 find	 it	 even	 more	 difficult	 ever	 to
assume	imperial	power.	Besides,	vacillating	and	showing	weakness	was	not	the	way	to	impress	–	or	to
control	–	his	nobles.

‘H

He	looked	away.	Hamida	hesitated	a	moment.	‘You	fool,’	she	whispered	at	last.
A	month	later,	Akbar	stirred	in	his	sleep	and	moved	a	little	closer	to	Mayala,	whose	warm,	naked	body
was	 curled	 against	 his.	 Their	 love-making	 had	 been	 long	 and	 vigorous	 and	 now,	 in	 his	 semiconsciousness,	a	deep	contentment	seeped	through	him.
‘Majesty	.	.	.	Majesty,	wake	up.’	At	the	feel	of	a	hand	on	his	shoulder,	he	opened	sleepy	eyes	to	see	the
dry,	wrinkled	face	of	the	keeper	of	the	haram	looking	down	at	him.
‘What	is	it?’	Akbar	looked	instinctively	for	his	dagger.	Even	in	the	haram	the	emperor	must	always	be
prepared	for	attack.
‘A	messenger	has	come.	One	of	Ahmed	Khan’s	scouts.	He	says	he	has	news	that	will	not	wait.’
‘Very	well.’	Akbar	rose,	wrapped	a	robe	around	him,	thrust	his	feet	into	pointed	red	leather	slippers
and	followed	the	old	woman	to	the	doors	of	the	haram.	Outside,	beyond	the	guards	by	the	entrance,	he
recognised	the	scout.	He	looked	dirty	and	tired	but	what	struck	Akbar	most	was	his	expression.	‘What	is
it?’
‘Bad	news,	Majesty.	About	four	weeks	ago,	Bairam	Khan	with	ten	of	his	men	were	attacked	while	out
hunting	near	his	camp	on	the	banks	of	the	Chambal	river.’
‘And	Bairam	Khan?’	The	blood	was	already	draining	from	Akbar’s	face.	He	had	guessed	the	answer.
‘Killed,	Majesty,	along	with	all	his	hunting	companions.’
‘You	are	certain?’
‘Yes.	Others	of	his	party	discovered	the	bodies	half	hidden	among	the	reeds	along	the	Chambal.’
‘I	want	to	question	them.	I	must	know	exactly	what	they	found.’
‘They	are	still	on	the	road	to	Agra	after	attending	to	the	funeral	rites.	I	had	the	news	from	the	post	rider
they	had	sent	ahead,	whom	I	encountered	at	a	caravanserai	in	Dholpur.	Learning	who	I	was,	he	told	me
what	had	occurred	and	gave	me	this	letter	for	you,	written	by	Bairam	Khan’s	senior	officer.’	The	scout
pulled	a	folded	piece	of	paper	from	his	dusty	green	leather	satchel.
As	Akbar	opened	it,	a	second	folded	note	speckled	red-brown	in	one	corner	fell	to	the	ground.	Akbar
picked	it	up,	then	handed	the	first	letter	back	to	the	scout.	‘Read	it	to	me.’
‘“Majesty,”’	 the	 man	 began,	 ‘“it	 grieves	 me	 to	 report	 that	 Bairam	 Khan	 has	 been	 murdered.	 We
discovered	his	body	and	those	of	our	comrades	on	the	banks	of	the	Chambal	river.	All	had	been	killed	by
arrows,	many	shot	in	the	back.	In	the	case	of	Bairam	Khan	–	and	this	is	terrible	to	relate	–	the	head	had
been	hacked	off.	We	found	it	some	yards	away	at	the	edge	of	the	water.	All	the	bodies	had	been	stripped
of	jewels,	money	and	weapons.	Though	we	searched	for	signs	to	tell	us	which	way	the	attackers	had	gone,
we	could	find	none.	Perhaps	they	fled	by	boat.	As	proof	of	what	I	relate	I	am	sending	a	paper	found	on
Bairam	Khan’s	body.”’
Slowly	Akbar	opened	the	second	letter.	He	didn’t	need	anyone	to	read	it	to	him.	He	knew	what	it	was	–
the	order	written	by	Maham	Anga	on	his	behalf	to	Bairam	Khan	to	depart	on	the	haj.	He	also	knew	what
the	dark	brown	stain	was	–	Bairam	Khan’s	blood.
Three	hours	later,	from	the	balcony	of	his	apartments	Akbar	watched	the	first	shafts	of	sunlight	warming
the	battlements	of	the	Agra	fort,	but	he	didn’t	feel	it.	Instead	he	was	shivering	as	if	the	world	around	him
were	 coated	 with	 ice.	 He	 could	 scarcely	 believe	 Bairam	 Khan	 was	 dead.	 He	 would	 make	 sure	 the
perpetrators	were	found	and	punished	as	savagely	as	they	deserved,	but	wasn’t	he	also	guilty?	If	he	hadn’t
broken	with	Bairam	Khan	and	sent	him	away,	he	would	still	be	alive.	And	what	would	his	mother	say?

She	had	been	angrier	than	he	had	ever	seen	her	on	hearing	that	he	had	dismissed	his	commander-in-chief.
How	would	she	react	to	his	murder?
In	the	courtyard	below	he	heard	the	timekeeper	strike	the	brass	disc	that	signalled	the	end	of	his	watch.
Soon	the	sun	would	be	well	above	the	horizon.	He	must	not	make	the	mistake	of	allowing	Hamida	to	learn
the	news	from	anyone	else	as	he	had	that	of	Bairam	Khan’s	dismissal.	He	must	go	to	her	straight	away.
Splashing	 himself	 with	 water,	 he	 dressed	 quickly	 without	 the	 aid	 of	 his	 attendants	 whom	 in	 his	 black
mood	he	had	ordered	not	to	disturb	him	and	made	his	way	to	her	apartments.	Though	it	was	barely	past
dawn,	Hamida	was	already	awake	and	he	saw	at	once	from	her	tear-streaked	face	that	he	was	too	late.
‘Forgive	me,	Mother.	You	were	right.	I	should	never	have	sent	Bairam	Khan	away.	God	has	punished
me.’	He	waited	for	a	torrent	of	anger	to	flow	from	her	lips	but	she	stood	silent,	eyes	downcast.
‘Bairam	Khan	was	like	a	member	of	the	family,’	she	said	at	last.	‘His	death	cuts	me	to	the	heart.	But	I
do	not	blame	you	for	his	murder	and	you	should	not	blame	yourself.	You	wanted	to	be	free	of	his	influence
but	you	never	meant	him	harm,	I	know	that.	Akbar	.	.	.’	She	drew	herself	up.	‘Discover	everything	you	can
about	his	murder.	Find	his	killers	–	common	bandits,	hired	assassins,	whoever	they	are	–	find	them	and
make	them	pay	in	blood	for	what	they	have	done.’
‘I	will.	I	promise.’	Akbar	hesitated,	half	hoping,	childlike,	that	she	might	embrace	him,	but	her	hands
remained	by	her	sides.	He	knew	he	was	dismissed.
It	was	some	time	before	he	returned	to	his	own	quarters.	Needing	space	and	fresh	air,	he	climbed	to	the
battlements	of	the	fort.	The	waters	of	the	Jumna	glinted	amber	in	the	early	morning	light	but	his	mind’s	eye
was	 filled	 with	 very	 different	 scenes	 –	 himself	 riding	 in	 triumph	 into	 Delhi	 with	 his	 father	 and	 Bairam
Khan;	 Bairam	 Khan’s	 hand	 resting	 on	 his	 shoulder	 as	 they	 stood	 by	 his	 father’s	 grave;	 steel	 blades
flashing	as	Bairam	Khan	taught	him	subtle	Persian	sword	tricks,	insisting	Akbar	try	again	and	again	until
his	technique	was	perfect;	Bairam	Khan’s	indigo	eyes	watching	approvingly	as	he	practised	his	musketry.
How	could	he	have	ignored	the	bonds	of	trust	between	them	and	acted	as	he	had?	He	had	allowed	himself
to	be	influenced	against	Bairam	Khan	by	Maham	Anga	because,	thoughtlessly,	selfishly,	impetuously,	he
had	wished	to	think	badly	of	him	because	he	wanted	to	rule.	It	was	as	simple	as	that.
At	last,	with	the	sun	rising	high	into	a	pale	blue	sky	patterned	with	clouds	blowing	in	from	the	west,
Akbar	 returned	 to	 his	 rooms.	 Almost	 at	 once	 he	 noticed	 an	 item	 he	 was	 sure	 hadn’t	 been	 there	 earlier.
Someone	had	placed	what	looked	like	a	strip	of	material	on	top	of	the	ivory	and	mother	of	pearl	inlaid
box	in	which	Akbar	kept	some	of	his	jewels.	They	had	also	taken	the	precaution	of	weighting	the	strip
down	with	an	ivory	paperweight	carved	like	a	lotus	flower.	Picking	up	the	material,	Akbar	saw	it	was	a
scrap	of	pale	green	silk	with	several	lines	of	writing	upon	it.	Here	and	there	the	author	had	allowed	a	few
drops	of	blue	ink	to	fall.	It	looked	like	the	work	of	a	child	and	he	was	about	to	toss	it	aside	when	some
instinct	 told	 him	 not	 to.	 Instead,	 he	 took	 the	 piece	 of	 fabric	 out	 on	 to	 the	 balcony	 where	 the	 light	 was
better.	Why	had	the	author	chosen	to	write	on	silk	not	paper?	Perhaps	to	disguise	their	handwriting,	not
that	it	made	any	difference	to	him,	since	he	couldn’t	read	it	anyway.	The	more	he	looked,	the	more	the
thick,	inky	symbols	seemed	to	dance	about.	Akbar	summoned	his	qorchi.
‘What	does	this	say?’
The	young	man	studied	it	for	a	moment	then	looked	up,	eyes	startled.	‘It’s	a	warning,	Majesty.	It	says,
“Though	a	river	of	milk	from	the	same	breasts	binds	you,	your	milk-brother	is	not	your	friend.	Ask	Adham
Khan	what	he	knows	about	the	murder	of	Bairam	Khan.”’
‘You	 are	 certain	 that’s	 what’s	 written?’	 The	 qorchi	 nodded.	 ‘Give	 it	 back	 to	 me.’	 Akbar	 tucked	 the
piece	of	silk	inside	his	tunic.	‘Say	nothing	about	this	to	anyone.	It	is	just	a	piece	of	malice	written	by	an
enemy	of	Adham	Khan.’
‘Yes,	Majesty.’

Akbar	tried	to	put	the	odd	message	out	of	his	mind,	but	couldn’t.	Whoever	had	written	the	warning	had
not	had	the	courage	to	accuse	Adham	Khan	openly.	Why?	Because	they	feared	retribution	or	because	they
were	 trying	 to	 make	 mischief?	 Poison	 once	 poured	 out	 was	 hard	 to	 put	 back	 in	 the	 flask	 –	 some	 drops
always	 escaped.	 Whatever	 the	 case,	 they	 had	 shattered	 his	 peace	 of	 mind,	 making	 him	 think	 the
unthinkable	–	that	the	youth	he	had	grown	up	with	and	loved	as	a	brother	might	be	his	foe.	After	all,	it	had
been	Adham	Khan’s	mother	who	had	warned	him	against	Bairam	Khan.	But	he	had	just	made	one	terrible
error	of	judgement	that	had	cost	him	a	friend.	He	must	not	rashly	make	another.
‘Akbar,	look!	I	told	you	my	hawk	was	the	best,’	shouted	Adham	Khan.	High	above	their	heads,	the	bird
swooped	like	an	arrow	on	the	pigeon	it	had	been	pursuing.	‘I	win!’
A	few	minutes	later,	Adham	Khan	held	out	his	left	arm	and	his	yellow-eyed	hawk	landed	on	the	elbowlength	leather	gauntlet,	curved	beak	bloodied	and	more	blood	staining	the	leather	jesses	trailing	from	its
legs.	 Still	 smiling	 triumphantly,	 he	 returned	 the	 bird	 to	 a	 wooden	 perch	 driven	 into	 the	 ground,	 tied	 the
jesses	to	the	plaited	leather	leash	attached	to	the	perch	and	placed	a	tufted	cap	inlaid	with	tiger	eyes	over
the	bird’s	head.
‘I	concede.	Your	hawk	makes	the	faster	kill,’	said	Akbar.
‘I	told	you	your	new	falconer	hasn’t	been	training	your	birds	properly	to	follow	the	lure.	Let	mine	have
care	of	them	for	a	few	days,	then	you’ll	see	the	difference.’	Adham	Khan’s	wide-jawed,	strong-featured
face	was	split	by	a	broad	grin.
‘Perhaps.’	Akbar	smiled	back.	It	was	as	well	that	Adham	Khan	couldn’t	see	into	his	mind,	he	thought.	It
was	 also	 good	 that	 his	 swaggering	 milk-brother	 was	 too	 conceited	 to	 wonder	 why	 Akbar	 had	 recently
been	seeking	his	company.	In	the	aftermath	of	the	victory	over	Hemu	and	the	triumphal	progress	through
Hindustan	they	had	seen	relatively	little	of	each	other,	but	as	Akbar’s	doubts	had	grown	about	the	cause	of
Bairam	Khan’s	death	he	had	deliberately	invited	Adham	Khan	hunting	or	hawking,	or	to	join	in	games	of
polo	on	the	banks	of	the	Jumna.	All	the	time,	while	seemingly	focused	only	on	the	sport	in	hand,	Akbar
had	 been	 observing	 his	 milk-brother	 carefully,	 but	 Adham	 Khan	 had	 done	 or	 said	 nothing	 to	 rouse	 his
suspicions.	He	was	merely	his	usual	boastful,	ebullient	self.
But	in	that	case,	whom	had	he	so	offended	that	they	wished	to	damage	him	in	Akbar’s	eyes	with	their
scrawled	note	implying	his	complicity	in	Bairam	Khan’s	death?	Akbar	frowned	as	he	watched	his	milkbrother	dig	his	heels	into	his	horse’s	sides	and	canter	over	to	where	the	falconers	were	waiting	with	fresh
birds.	Though	he	had	offered	a	huge	reward	–	enough	to	feed	an	entire	village	for	ten	years	–	even	after
three	months	there	was	still	no	intelligence	about	who	had	slaughtered	Bairam	Khan.
Thoughts	 of	 conspiracy	 –	 however	 shadowy	 and	 insubstantial	 –	 never	 left	 him,	 but	 he	 must	 learn
patience.	 Across	 such	 a	 vast	 and	 in	 places	 untamed	 land	 as	 Hindustan,	 information	 took	 time	 to	 travel.
Perhaps	Ahmed	Khan	and	his	network	of	spies	and	scouts	would	soon	have	news.	He	had	promised	his
mother	he’d	not	rest	until	he’d	found	and	punished	the	murderers	and	he	would	keep	his	word.	Should	he
have	told	her	about	the	curious	warning	on	the	piece	of	silk?	he	wondered	yet	again.	Often	he	had	been	on
the	brink	of	it	but	each	time	had	drawn	back,	fearing	it	would	only	distress	and	alarm	her.	And,	of	course,
he	could	say	nothing	about	it	to	Maham	Anga	either	.	.	.
The	council	meeting	had	seemed	especially	long	and	tedious.	Akbar’s	head	was	aching	and	he	wanted	to
hear	 nothing	 further	 about	 caravanserai	 construction	 or	 revenue	 gathering.	 But	 as	 he	 left	 the	 council
chamber	and	made	his	way	to	the	women’s	quarters	his	mood	lightened.	A	few	days	ago,	a	new	ally	from

the	hill	country	beyond	the	Jhelum	river	had	sent	some	concubines	to	join	Akbar’s	haram.	The	party	had
reached	Agra	three	nights	ago	and	now	Akbar	was	eager	to	see	the	women	for	himself.	His	first	bashful
though	passionate	love-making	with	Mayala	seemed	to	belong	to	another	life.	She	was	still	his	favourite
but	 he	 had	 found	 many	 other	 women	 to	 please	 him	 too.	 In	 the	 haram	 he	 felt	 free	 of	 court	 cares.	 At	 the
thought	of	fresh	pleasures	ahead	he	quickened	his	step.
The	elderly	khawajasara	was	waiting	for	him	and	smilingly	led	him	to	a	room	hung	with	brilliant	silks
and	ornaments	of	coloured	glass	that	were	also	a	gift	from	Akbar’s	new	ally.	‘The	girls	have	been	made
ready	 and	 are	 eager	 to	 serve	 you.	 You	 have	 only	 to	 choose	 the	 one	 who	 pleases	 you	 the	 most.’	 She
clapped	her	hands	and	a	door	in	a	side	alcove	opened.	Three	young	women	entered,	dressed	identically	in
tight-fitting	bodices	and	wide	trousers	fastened	at	their	waists	with	pearl	tassels.	Their	dark	hair,	pulled
back	from	their	faces	with	jewelled	clasps,	gleamed	with	henna.	Two	were	tall	and	voluptuous	while	the
third	was	short	and	delicately	formed.	She	was	exquisite	but	something	more	than	her	beauty	held	Akbar’s
attention.	She	was	standing	very	still	and	breathing	rapidly	like	a	deer	that	knows	the	hunter	is	there	and	is
too	afraid	to	move.	Her	vulnerability	moved	him	and	he	felt	a	strong	desire	to	show	her	she	had	nothing	to
fear	from	him.
‘This	one’
‘She	is	called	Shayzada.	You	have	chosen	well,	Majesty.’
‘Leave	us,	please.’	As	the	keeper	ushered	the	other	girls	from	the	room,	Akbar	saw	Shayzada’s	eyes
shining	with	tears.	‘Don’t	be	afraid.	If	you	are	not	willing,	say	so.	I	would	never	force	any	woman.’
‘I’m	 not	 afraid	 of	 you,	 Majesty.’	 She	 spoke	 the	 old	 Moghul	 language,	 Turki,	 but	 haltingly	 and	 with	 a
strange	accent	Akbar	had	never	heard.
‘Then	what	is	it?’	He	came	closer,	noting	the	delicate	oval	of	her	face	and	the	unusual	vivid	blue	of	her
eyes	 that	 for	 a	 moment	 reminded	 him	 of	 Bairam	 Khan.	 She	 looked	 so	 achingly	 beautiful	 he	 wanted	 to
reach	 out	 and	 touch	 her.	 She	 hesitated,	 and	 when	 finally	 she	 spoke	 he	 could	 tell	 she	 was	 choosing	 her
words	with	great	care.	‘When	I	was	told	I	was	to	come	to	your	court,	it	was	a	great	honour	and	I	was
happy.	So	were	my	two	elder	sisters.’
‘The	two	young	women	who	were	with	you	just	now?’
‘No,	they	are	not	my	kin.’
‘Then	where	are	you	sisters?’
Her	face	tightened.	‘When	our	party	was	still	two	days	from	Agra,	a	group	of	Moghul	soldiers	stopped
us.	They	said	that	they	were	an	advance	guard	sent	by	you	to	inspect	us	and	take	the	most	beautiful	to	you
at	 once.	 They	 said	 you	 were	 impatient	 and	 took	 my	 sisters	 away.	 When	 we	 reached	 Agra,	 I	 asked	 the
keeper	of	the	haram	where	they	were	but	she	said	she	knew	nothing	of	any	other	women.	Please,	Majesty,
I	am	frightened	for	my	sisters	.	.	.’
‘I	gave	no	orders	for	any	advance	guard.	Who	was	their	commander?’
‘I’m	not	sure,	but	I	think	I	heard	one	of	the	soldiers	address	him	as	Adham	Khan.’
Akbar’s	head	jerked	back	in	surprise.	‘Did	you	see	any	of	their	faces?’
‘It	was	evening,	and	anyway	the	men	had	face	cloths	pulled	up	to	their	eyes.’
The	 tears	 were	 running	 down	 her	 face	 now	 and	 she	 made	 no	 effort	 to	 wipe	 them	 away,	 but	 Akbar,
overcome	with	anger,	was	no	longer	attending	to	her.	‘Wait	here,’	he	said.
A	few	minutes	later	he	was	striding	towards	his	milk-mother’s	apartments.	Waving	her	attendants	aside,
he	flung	the	silver	doors	open	himself	and	burst	in.	Seeing	the	expression	on	his	face,	Maham	Anga,	who
had	been	writing	in	a	book,	at	once	closed	its	ivory	covers,	fastened	the	gilt	clasp	and	rose	to	her	feet.
‘Akbar,	what’s	the	matter?’
‘Where	is	your	son?’

‘Away	hunting.	I	haven’t	seen	him	for	nearly	a	week.’
‘Have	him	found	–	wherever	he	is	–	and	tell	him	to	return	to	the	court	immediately.’
‘Of	course.	He	is	yours	to	command.	But	why?’
‘A	 woman	 newly	 arrived	 in	 the	 haram	 –	 sent	 to	 me	 with	 several	 others	 as	 a	 token	 of	 respect	 and
friendship	by	a	new	ally	–	accuses	him	of	abducting	two	of	them	–	her	sisters.’
Maham	Anga	paled.	If	her	son	had	committed	such	a	crime	she	certainly	knew	nothing	about	it.
‘The	accusation	is	very	serious,’	Akbar	said	more	gently,	‘but	let	my	milk-brother	answer	the	charge.	If
he	is	innocent	he	has	nothing	to	fear.’
‘Of	 course.’	 Maham	 Anga	 put	 a	 hand	 on	 his	 arm.	 ‘But,	 Akbar,	 there	 has	 been	 some	 mistake.	 My	 son
would	never	.	.	.’	Her	voice	faltered.
‘Let	us	hope	you	are	right.’
In	 fact,	 Akbar	 learned	 the	 fate	 of	 the	 missing	 young	 women	 three	 days	 before	 Adham	 Khan	 and	 his
hunting	 party	 of	 other	 young	 nobles	 came	 riding	 up	 the	 ramp	 into	 the	 Agra	 fort	 in	 obedience	 to	 his
summons.	 He	 was	 woken	 with	 news	 that	 two	 female	 bodies	 had	 been	 pulled	 from	 the	 Jumna	 river.	 A
camel	driver	taking	his	beasts	down	to	the	water’s	edge	to	drink	had	found	them.	Both	were	naked,	and
their	throats	had	been	cut.
‘What	 is	 it,	 Akbar?	 Why	 did	 you	 summon	 me	 to	 your	 apartments	 so	 late	 when	 I’m	 still	 tired	 and	 dusty
from	my	journey?’
‘Adham	Khan,	do	your	remember	how	we	used	to	gallop	our	ponies	through	the	meadows	beneath	the
Kabul	fortress?’
‘Of	course	I	do.	But	I	don’t	see—’
‘Those	were	good	times.	We	seldom	spent	a	day	apart.’
‘That	is	what	a	milk-brother	is	for.’
‘It	was	more	than	that.	I	had	no	brothers	or	sisters	of	my	own.	Without	you	I	would	have	been	lonely.
And	when	I	was	kidnapped	from	my	parents	by	my	uncles,	your	mother	was	my	sole	protector	and	you
shared	 my	 captivity,	 suffered	 the	 same	 hardships,	 faced	 the	 same	 perils	 .	 .	 .	 That	 is	 what	 makes	 what	 I
have	to	ask	you	so	difficult.	But	we	are	no	longer	boys,	and	I	am	an	emperor,	and	so	I	must.’
‘What	are	you	trying	to	say,	Akbar?’	Adham	Khan’s	light	brown	eyes	–	so	like	Maham	Anga’s	–	were
fixed	on	Akbar’s	face	and	his	expression	was	no	longer	light-hearted.
‘Three	days	ago,	an	old	man	–	a	camel	driver	–	discovered	the	bodies	of	two	young	women	floating	in
the	river	when	he	took	his	beasts	to	drink.	He	found	a	long	stick	and	with	its	help	dragged	them	to	the
bank	 and	 raised	 the	 alarm.	 The	 corpses	 weren’t	 very	 pretty.’	 Akbar	 again	 saw	 before	 him	 the	 grazed,
muddy	bodies,	already	buzzing	with	flies,	that	he	had	insisted	on	viewing.	Those	staring	eyes	–	a	paler
blue	than	Shayzada’s	–	looking	sightlessly	out	from	purpling	bloated	faces,	those	gaping	blood-encrusted
throats,	had	somehow	been	more	horrible	than	anything	he’d	witnessed	on	the	battlefield.
Adham	Khan	shrugged	slightly.	‘I’m	sorry	to	hear	it,	but	what	has	this	to	do	with	me?’
‘Be	 patient.	 I	 ordered	 my	 hakim	 to	 examine	 the	 bodies.	 He	 told	 me	 the	 cuts	 were	 deep	 and	 clean	 –
probably	inflicted	with	a	sharp	dagger	–	and	that	the	women	had	not	been	dead	for	more	than	two	or	three
days.	 He	 also	 said	 they	 had	 been	 raped.’	 Again	 Akbar’s	 mind	 conjured	 the	 shameful	 scene:	 two	 young
women,	sent	to	what	should	have	been	a	luxurious	and	pampered	life	at	his	court,	lying	blood-stained	and
violated	on	the	hakim’s	marble	slab.	‘Adham	Khan,	do	you	know	who	these	women	were?’
‘Why	should	I?’
Akbar	studied	his	milk-brother’s	indignant	face.	‘Are	you	certain?’

‘Of	course.	Are	you	accusing	me	of	killing	them?’
‘No.	I’m	only	asking	whether	you	knew	them.’
‘But	why?	Someone	must	have	implicated	me.’
‘The	women’s	sister,	Shayzada,	told	me	that	as	they	were	all	on	their	way	here	their	party	was	stopped
by	 Moghul	 soldiers	 and	 her	 sisters	 were	 abducted.	 Shayzada	 heard	 one	 of	 the	 men	 address	 their
commander	as	Adham	Khan.’
‘It’s	a	lie.	Someone	must	have	bribed	her	to	discredit	me.’
‘You	 swear	 to	 me,	 then,	 that	 neither	 you	 nor	 your	 men	 had	 anything	 to	 do	 with	 the	 abductions	 or	 the
murders?’
‘I	swear	as	your	milk-brother.’	Adham	Khan’s	strong	hand	grasped	Akbar’s.	‘I	would	never	violate	the
bond	between	us.’
‘Then	I	accept	what	you	say.’
‘Where	is	this	woman,	Shayzada?’
‘Here	in	the	haram.	I	offered	to	send	her	home	but	she	chose	instead	to	serve	my	aunt	who,	moved	by
her	story,	has	offered	to	take	her	into	her	household.’
Adham	Khan	said	nothing	but	Akbar	noticed	the	rapid	rise	and	fall	of	his	chest.	‘You	mustn’t	blame	her,
Adham	Khan.	She	didn’t	know	who	you	were	when	she	named	you	and	she	must	have	been	mistaken	in
what	she	thought	she	heard	.	.	.	it	was	understandable	in	the	fear	and	confusion.	I	am	certain	she	wasn’t
coerced	or	bribed	to	speak	as	she	did.	Now	let’s	talk	of	pleasanter	things.	I’ve	seen	a	roan	stallion	I’d
like	your	opinion	on	.	.	.’
It	was	a	relief	to	move	on	to	ordinary	topics.	Though	he’d	had	no	choice,	it	had	embarrassed	him	to
question	 his	 milk-brother.	 Adham	 Khan’s	 angry,	 earnest	 rebuttal	 had	 been	 a	 relief.	 All	 the	 same,	 Akbar
knew	that	something	had	changed	between	them.	The	very	fact	of	his	asking	Adham	Khan	to	declare	his
innocence	must	surely	mark	the	end	of	their	old	boyhood	intimacy.	But,	as	he	had	told	his	milk-brother,	he
was	the	emperor.

Chapter	5

Milk	and	Blood

n	 a	 humid	 May	 afternoon,	 Akbar	 slept,	 head	 cushioned	 by	 Mayala’s	 soft,	 voluptuously	 rounded
stomach,	 as	 a	 peacock-feather	 punkah	 pulled	 on	 a	 long	 rope	 by	 an	 attendant	 in	 an	 adjacent	 room
stirred	 the	 hot	 air	 above	 them.	 They	 had	 just	 enjoyed	 a	 particularly	 exhausting	 and	 innovative	 bout	 of
love-making	and	Akbar	should	have	been	dreaming	of	pleasurable	things.	Instead	strange	images	filled	his
mind,	causing	him	to	stir	and	even	cry	out.	Feeling	a	hand	on	his	forehead	he	sat	up	with	a	start,	but	it	was
only	Mayala	trying	to	soothe	him.	It	had	been	like	this	ever	since	the	two	young	women’s	bodies	had	been
found,	 though	 that	 was	 eight	 weeks	 ago	 now.	 Every	 day,	 despite	 himself,	 he	 was	 growing	 more
preoccupied,	more	watchful,	every	instinct	sensing	a	threat	that	seemed	all	the	more	dangerous	because	he
didn’t	know	when	or	from	where	it	would	come.
Akbar	sat	up	and	pushed	back	his	black	hair	from	his	hot	forehead.	He	felt	Mayala	kneel	up	behind	him,
pressing	her	naked	breasts	against	his	back	and	putting	her	arms	round	his	neck.	She	was	murmuring	in	his
ear,	something	about	a	new	position	–	the	Coupling	of	the	Lion	–	that	might	please	him,	but	tempting	as	it
was	he	gently	disengaged	himself	and	stood	up.	He	had	summoned	his	counsellors	and	courtiers	to	meet
later	that	afternoon	and	before	then	he	needed	to	think.
Since	 Bairam	 Khan’s	 exile	 and	 death	 he	 had	 had	 no	 khan-i-khanan,	 no	 commander-in-chief.	 Even
though	he	felt	confident	in	his	own	judgement,	it	was	time	to	select	one	and	also	to	consider	some	other
court	 appointments	 so	 that	 he	 could	 shed	 some	 of	 his	 more	 mundane	 responsibilities.	 At	 some	 point	 he
must	also	appoint	a	vizier	–	a	post	it	had	not	been	necessary	to	fill	while	Bairam	Khan	was	alive	–	but
there	was	no	particular	hurry	for	that.	Better	to	observe	his	counsellors	carefully	before	making	such	an
important	decision.	A	corrupt	or	self-seeking	vizier	would	be	worse	than	no	vizier	at	all.	But	he	needed	a
new	chief	quartermaster	urgently.	The	present	one	had,	as	a	very	young	man,	served	Akbar’s	grandfather
Babur.	He	was	now	so	old	he	could	scarcely	stand	and	continually	addressed	Akbar	as	‘Babur’,	while
mumbling	wonderingly	about	how	much	he	seemed	to	have	changed.	Akbar	had	also	decided	to	revive	the
old	Moghul	post	of	master-of-horse	to	oversee	the	purchase	of	large	numbers	of	horses	for	the	campaigns
of	conquest	he	was	planning.
He	knew	he	must	choose	with	care.	Each	of	those	posts	conferred	privileges	and	prestige	on	the	holder,
and	all	would	be	coveted.	He	had	no	doubt	whom	he	wished	to	make	khan-i-khanan.	Ahmed	Khan	had
demonstrated	 unflinching	 loyalty	 to	 the	 dynasty	 from	 the	 early	 days	 of	 Humayun’s	 reign.	 He	 was	 also	 a
shrewd	military	tactician.	He	had	served	Akbar’s	father	through	all	his	dangerous	years	of	flight	and	exile
and	 ridden	 at	 his	 shoulder	 from	 Kabul	 on	 the	 reconquest	 of	 Hindustan,	 as	 well	 as	 fighting	 with	 Akbar
against	Hemu.	The	choice	of	Ahmed	Khan	as	khan-i-khanan	might	disappoint	some	of	Akbar’s	generals
but	none	could	call	Ahmed	Khan	unworthy.
But	the	post	of	chief	quartermaster	was	problematic.	The	man	he	chose	would	be	responsible	for	all	the
supplying	of	the	Moghul	army	–	from	the	corn	to	feed	the	horses	to	the	gunpowder	and	cannon	balls	to
feed	the	artillery.	No	other	post	except	that	of	comptroller	of	the	household,	held	by	Humayun’s	one	time
qorchi	and	companion	Jauhar	in	return	for	his	years	of	selfless	service,	offered	so	many	opportunities	for

O

corruption.	 When	 he	 had	 consulted	 his	 mother	 Hamida,	 she	 had	 suggested	 Atga	 Khan,	 an	 officer	 from
Kabul	who	had	escorted	her	to	Delhi	when	Humayun	had	summoned	her	to	join	him	in	Hindustan.	‘He	is	a
wise	and	honourable	man	whose	two	daughters	are	in	my	service.	He	protected	me	on	the	long	journey
and	 will	 I	 am	 sure	 protect	 your	 interests	 as	 your	 quartermaster,’	 she	 had	 said,	 smooth	 brow	 knitted	 in
thought.	Following	further	enquiries	–	as	discreet	as	he	could	make	them	–	Akbar	had	decided	to	follow
his	mother’s	advice.	It	would	please	her,	he	knew.
As	for	his	master-of-horse,	Akbar	had	consulted	no	one	but	decided	after	much	reflection	to	appoint	his
milk-brother.	Adham	Khan	was	an	expert	judge	of	horseflesh	and	it	would	be	a	way	of	demonstrating	to
all	the	court	his	confidence	in	his	milk-brother	despite	the	rumours	that	had	inevitably	bubbled	up.	Akbar
knew	from	his	qorchi	that	his	questioning	of	Adham	Khan	about	the	deaths	of	the	two	young	women	was
no	secret.
Two	hours	later,	to	the	customary	blast	of	trumpets,	Akbar	entered	his	durbar	hall	through	the	arched
door	 to	 the	 left	 of	 his	 throne	 –	 his	 gleaming	 golden	 throne	 forged	 from	 the	 molten	 gold	 of	 Hemu’s
treasuries	that	he	had	now	set	up	in	its	permanent	place.	He	had	already	vowed	to	himself	to	ornament	it
further	 with	 gems	 captured	 in	 future	 wars	 as	 a	 visible	 symbol	 of	 his	 greatness	 and	 success.	 Seating
himself	on	the	green	velvet	cushion,	he	signalled	to	his	assembled	councillors	and	courtiers	to	sit.
Before	 speaking,	 Akbar	 glanced	 up	 at	 the	 small	 grille	 high	 in	 the	 wall	 behind	 which	 he	 was	 sure
Hamida	would	be	sitting	in	the	little	gallery	where	women	could	watch	and	listen	unseen.	He	thought	he
caught	 a	 glimpse	 of	 her.	 ‘I	 summoned	 you	 here	 today	 because	 I	 have	 decided	 to	 make	 certain
appointments.	Ahmed	Khan,	Atga	Khan	and	you,	my	milk-brother	Adham	Khan,	approach.’	As	soon	as	all
three	men	were	before	him,	Akbar	continued,	‘Ahmed	Khan,	in	recognition	of	your	many	years	of	service
first	to	my	father	and	now	to	me,	I	hereby	appoint	you	my	commander-in-chief,	my	khani-khanan.’
Ahmed	Khan’s	smile	above	his	long,	wispy	beard	showed	his	pleasure.	‘Majesty,	I	will	serve	you	to
the	utmost	of	my	ability.’
‘I	 know	 you	 will.	 You	 will	 also	 retain	 responsibility	 for	 intelligence	 gathering	 and	 remain	 the
emperor’s	 eyes	 and	 ears.’	 At	 a	 signal	 from	 Akbar,	 attendants	 stepped	 forward	 to	 present	 Ahmed	 Khan
with	a	green	brocade	robe	of	honour,	the	yak’s-tail	standard	–	an	emblem	of	authority	since	the	days	of
Genghis	Khan	–	and	a	jewelled	sword.
Next,	Akbar	turned	to	his	milk-brother.	‘Adham	Khan.	You	have	been	my	friend	and	companion	since
our	boyhood.	Now	I	wish	to	confer	on	you	a	position	you	richly	merit	and	will	discharge	with	honour.’
Adham	Khan’s	hazel	eyes	were	shining.	If	he’d	ever	wondered	about	his	milk-brother’s	ambition,	Akbar
thought	to	himself,	he	had	his	answer	now.	Not	that	ambition	itself	was	a	crime.	Indeed,	it	was	the	very
foundation	stone	of	the	Moghul	empire.
‘Step	forward,	my	milk-brother,	and	let	me	embrace	you	as	my	new	master-of-horse.’	Akbar	rose,	and
stepping	 down	 from	 the	 carved	 marble	 dais	 on	 which	 his	 throne	 stood	 he	 put	 his	 arms	 round	 Adham
Khan’s	shoulders	and	kissed	him	on	the	cheek.	But	if	he’d	expected	gratitude	he	was	disappointed.
‘Your	 master-of-horse?’	 As	 he	 spoke	 Adham	 Khan	 glanced	 for	 a	 second	 up	 at	 the	 grille	 in	 the	 wall.
Was	Maham	Anga	also	there?
‘Yes,	my	master-of-horse,’	repeated	Akbar,	his	smile	hardening	as	he	took	in	Adham	Khan’s	angry	and
bewildered	expression.	What	had	his	milk-brother	been	expecting?
As	if	suddenly	aware	of	Akbar’s	scrutiny,	Adham	Khan	seemed	to	pull	himself	together.	‘Thank	you,
Majesty,’	he	said	quietly.	He	acknowledged	the	traditional	gift	of	jewelled	bridle	and	saddle	held	out	to
him	on	velvet	cushions	by	two	attendants	and	stepped	back,	eyes	on	the	floor.
Akbar	 returned	 to	 his	 throne.	 ‘And	 you,	 Atga	 Khan.	 In	 recognition	 of	 your	 many	 services	 I	 hereby
appoint	you	my	chief	quartermaster.’

Atga	Khan,	a	tall,	broad-shouldered	man	with	a	thin	white	scar	running	from	his	right	eyebrow	to	his
left	cheekbone	–	a	legacy	of	an	ambush	by	Pashai	tribesmen	in	the	Khyber	Pass	many	years	ago	–	put	his
hand	on	his	breast	and	bowed	low.	‘Thank	you,	Majesty.	It	is	a	very	great	honour.’	When	he	too	had	been
presented	with	a	ceremonial	robe	and	the	insignia	of	his	office	–	a	jade	seal	on	a	thick	gold	chain	–	Akbar
rose	and	left	the	durbar	hall.
With	his	bodyguards	preceding	him	two	abreast	he	had	nearly	reached	the	doors	to	his	apartments	when
Adham	Khan	darted	out	from	a	side	corridor.	He	was	breathing	heavily	–	no	doubt	the	result	of	having	run
from	the	durbar	hall	to	intercept	Akbar.	Even	though	they	could	see	who	it	was,	Akbar’s	bodyguards	at
once	crossed	spears	to	stop	Adham	Khan	coming	any	nearer.	Their	orders	were	to	prevent	anybody	from
getting	close	to	the	emperor	without	permission,	and	the	penalty	for	negligence	was	death.
‘It’s	all	right.’	Akbar	nodded	to	the	guards,	who	lowered	their	spears.	‘What	is	it,	Adham	Khan?’
‘You	have	humiliated	me	in	front	of	all	the	court.’	His	milk-brother	was	so	angry	that	Akbar	could	see	a
vein	beating	in	his	right	temple.
‘Humiliated	you?	Be	careful	what	you	say,’	Akbar	replied	in	a	low	voice,	but	Adham	Khan	seemed	in
no	mood	for	restraint.
‘You’ve	made	a	fool	of	me!’	His	voice	was	even	louder	this	time.
Akbar	felt	a	strong	desire	to	launch	himself	at	him	and	wrestle	him	to	the	ground	just	as	he’d	done	a
thousand	 times	 when	 they	 were	 boys.	 Adham	 Khan	 had	 always	 had	 a	 temper,	 but	 Akbar	 was	 the	 better
fighter	 and	 had	 found	 fists	 to	 be	 the	 best	 way	 of	 winning	 any	 dispute.	 But	 that	 was	 when,	 beneath	 the
childish	rivalry,	they’d	been	friends.	Perhaps	they	were	so	no	longer	.	.	.	Looking	at	his	milk-brother’s
insolent	face,	Akbar	wondered	how	well	he	really	knew	him.	He	had	thought	it	was	very	well	indeed,	but
suddenly	he	was	no	longer	sure.
Conscious	of	the	curious	glances	of	his	bodyguards	and	the	other	attendants	hovering	about	the	entrance
to	 his	 apartments,	 he	 grabbed	 Adham	 Khan’s	 arm.	 ‘Whatever	 it	 is	 you	 wish	 to	 say,	 this	 isn’t	 the	 place.
Come	 in	 here.’	 When	 the	 doors	 closed	 behind	 them,	 he	 released	 his	 arm	 and	 turned	 to	 face	 him.	 ‘You
forget	yourself,’	he	said	coldly.
‘No,	you	forget	who	I	am.’
‘I	have	just	made	you	my	master-of-horse.	I	thought	you’d	be	glad	.	.	.’
‘Glad	 to	 be	 your	 stable	 boy?	 I	 deserve	 something	 better.	 Since	 the	 defeat	 of	 Hemu	 you’ve	 changed
towards	me	.	.	.	we	used	to	be	companions	who	did	everything	together	but	you	have	shut	me	out.	You
never	ask	what	I	think.	I	have	royal	Moghul	blood	in	my	veins	as	well	–	my	father	was	a	cousin	of	your
father	.	.	.’
‘What	appointment	were	you	hoping	for?	To	be	my	chief	quartermaster	perhaps,	or	my	khan-i-khanan?
I	chose	experienced	men	of	proven	ability	and	loyalty	.	.	.	men	I	could	trust	.	.	.’
‘Whom	should	you	trust	more	than	your	milk-brother?’
‘That	depends	on	the	milk-brother.’	The	words	came	out	before	Akbar	could	restrain	himself.
‘What	 do	 you	 mean?’	 When	 Akbar	 didn’t	 reply	 Adham	 Khan	 continued,	 ‘It’s	 because	 of	 those
kidnapped	concubines,	isn’t	it?	I	told	you	I	know	nothing	about	that.	It	was	a	plot.	Whoever	took	them	was
trying	to	implicate	and	ruin	me.’
‘Why	should	they	do	that?	You’re	not	important	enough	for	anyone	to	want	to	destroy	.	.	.	Bairam	Khan
warned	me	you	thought	too	well	of	yourself.’
‘Yes,	the	great	Bairam	Khan.	If	his	advice	was	so	invaluable,	why	did	you	send	him	away?’
The	sneer	on	Adham	Khan’s	lean	face	was	too	much	for	Akbar.	Before	he’d	quite	realised	it,	he’d	taken
a	swing	at	him	and	his	milk-brother	was	sprawling	on	the	ground.	Akbar	stepped	back,	balancing	himself
on	the	balls	of	his	feet	in	case	Adham	Khan,	who	was	scrambling	to	his	feet	and	wiping	blood	from	his

face,	 should	 try	 to	 come	 at	 him.	 But	 instead	 his	 milk-brother	 just	 stood	 very	 still,	 breathing	 heavily
through	his	bleeding	nose	and	glaring	at	him.
Akbar	 fought	 to	 master	 his	 anger.	 He	 must	 make	 Adham	 Khan	 see	 sense.	 ‘My	 brother,	 we	 have	 been
through	 much	 together	 and	 I	 can’t	 forget	 what	 I	 owe	 your	 mother,	 who	 risked	 her	 life	 to	 save	 mine.	 I
thought	 you	 would	 like	 to	 be	 master-of-horse	 and	 would	 discharge	 the	 duties	 with	 honour.	 I	 want	 to
expand	my	empire,	but	before	I	can	do	that	I	must	make	sure	my	army	is	ready.	Speed	has	always	been	one
of	the	Moghuls’	greatest	strengths.	Our	cavalry,	our	mounted	archers	and	musketmen,	require	the	strongest
and	swiftest	mounts,	but	after	the	campaign	against	Hemu	our	stables	need	replenishing.	Travel	through
the	empire	–	beyond,	if	necessary,	to	Turkey,	Persia,	Arabia	–	but	bring	me	back	the	best.’
Akbar	 moved	 towards	 his	 milk-brother,	 stepping	 over	 an	 incense	 burner	 that	 Adham	 Khan	 had	 sent
crashing	 to	 the	 ground	 as	 he	 fell.	 ‘Let’s	 forget	 what	 happened	 just	 now.’	 He	 took	 Adham	 Khan	 by	 the
shoulders	and	embraced	him,	ignoring	the	blood	dripping	on	to	his	pale	green	tunic.	But	Adham	Khan’s
body	 was	 stiff	 and	 unresponsive	 against	 his	 own.	 Akbar	 released	 him	 and	 stepped	 back.	 ‘I	 won’t	 say
anything	to	Maham	Anga	about	this,’	he	said	dispassionately.	‘It	would	only	distress	her.’
‘What	shall	I	say,	that	I	bruised	myself	in	a	fall	from	my	horse?’	Adham	Khan’s	tone	was	still	sneering.
‘Say	 what	 you	 like.	 There’s	 a	 bowl	 of	 water	 over	 there.	 Clean	 yourself	 up.’	 Akbar	 turned	 away.	 He
should	not	have	lost	his	temper	like	that	–	it	was	unworthy	of	him.	He	was	Adham	Khan’s	emperor	now,
not	his	equal.	Both	of	them	should	remember	that.
The	rains	had	come	early,	falling	from	skies	so	grey	and	heavy	with	clouds	they	looked	as	if	they	meant	to
engulf	the	sodden	world	beneath	them.	The	swollen	waters	of	the	Jumna	had	burst	their	banks	two	weeks
ago	and	since	then	an	unwholesome	collection	of	detritus	had	come	bobbing	past	the	fort	–	drowned	sheep
and	dogs,	even	a	camel,	thin	legs	ludicrously	splayed	as	the	current	whirled	it	round.	It	was	the	time	of
year	 that	 Akbar	 disliked	 most	 in	 Hindustan,	 when	 everything	 seemed	 rotten	 with	 moisture.	 Despite	 the
summer	heat,	fires	of	camphor	wood	were	lit	for	a	few	hours	each	day	in	the	important	apartments	and	in
the	haram	to	protect	the	sumptuous	silks,	brocades	and	velvets	from	damp	and	from	the	legions	of	insects
that	infested	anywhere	they	could	gain	entry.
Akbar	 could	 smell	 the	 slightly	 acrid	 camphor	 now	 as	 he	 lay	 naked	 on	 a	 low	 red-sheeted	 bed	 in
Mayala’s	chamber.	She	was	massaging	his	back	and	shoulders	with	almond	oil	to	relax	him	and	rid	him	of
the	sharp	headache	behind	his	eyes	that	often	came	upon	him	during	the	monsoon,	and	had	been	troubling
him	 all	 day.	 His	 father	 had	 also	 suffered	 from	 it.	 In	 his	 youth,	 Humayun’s	 favourite	 remedy	 had	 been
pellets	of	opium	dissolved	in	wine,	but	his	addiction	had	nearly	cost	him	his	throne	and	he	had	warned
Akbar	against	it.
Perhaps	if	Humayun	had	had	Mayala	to	massage	him	he	wouldn’t	have	needed	opium.	Akbar	grunted
with	satisfaction	as	he	felt	the	palms	of	her	hands	working	methodically	and	expertly	over	his	muscles,
releasing	 the	 tension.	 She	 could	 also	 make	 him	 laugh.	 A	 sharp	 observer,	 she	 could	 mercilessly	 mimic
every	member	of	his	court,	from	his	comptroller	of	the	household,	Jauhar	–	as	pursed-lipped	when	he	was
scribbling	in	his	leather-bound	ledgers	as	when	he	was	playing	his	flute	–	to	Ahmed	Khan,	unconsciously
tugging	at	his	thin	little	beard.
Akbar	stretched	out	his	strong	body	–	hardened	and	battle-ready	as	any	of	his	soldiers’-	the	better	to
enjoy	Mayala’s	touch.	The	pain	behind	his	eyes	had	almost	gone,	and,	resting	his	forehead	on	his	forearms
and	closing	his	eyes,	he	began	to	allow	himself	to	drift	off	into	sleep.	But	almost	at	once	he	became	aware
of	raised	voices	not	too	far	away	from	him.	They	sounded	angry	–	very	angry.	Then	above	the	shouting
came	a	familiar	sound	–	the	clash	of	steel	on	steel.	Someone	was	fighting.	He	heard	female	screams	and,

above	it	all,	a	deep	voice	he	knew	well	calling,	‘Akbar!	Come	out	and	fight	me,	you	coward	.	.	.’
Drowsiness	gone,	Akbar	leapt	up.	Pausing	only	to	grab	his	dagger,	and	heedless	of	his	nakedness,	he
rushed	from	Mayala’s	chamber	out	into	the	courtyard.	The	rain	had	ceased	and	normally	there	would	have
been	 women	 singing,	 dancing	 or	 sitting	 by	 the	 fountain	 talking,	 but	 only	 one	 person	 was	 there	 now	 –
Adham	 Khan,	 standing	 just	 inside	 the	 entrance	 to	 the	 haram,	 a	 sword	 in	 one	 hand	 and	 a	 dagger	 in	 the
other.	Beyond	him,	in	the	watery	sunshine,	Akbar	could	see	the	spread-eagled	and	bloody	bodies	of	two
haram	guards,	the	legs	of	one	still	twitching.	He	turned	his	gaze	back	to	Adham	Khan.
‘What	are	you	doing?’	He	was	so	shocked	he	could	hardly	force	out	the	words.
His	 milk-brother	 was	 swaying.	 ‘I’ve	 killed	 that	 jumped-up	 dog	 Atga	 Khan	 .	 .	 .’	 A	 slur	 in	 his	 voice
confirmed	what	Akbar	already	guessed.	He	had	been	drinking	strong	spirits.
‘Why?	Atga	Khan	was	no	enemy	to	you.’
‘He	thought	himself	so	fine,	sitting	there	in	the	gaudy	robe	of	honour	that	should	have	been	mine	and
dictating	to	his	scribe	a	list	of	all	the	things	he	was	planning	to	do.	The	fool	even	smiled	at	me	when	I
entered	 his	 chamber.	 But	 he	 wasn’t	 smiling	 when	 I	 stabbed	 him	 right	 through	 the	 heart	 .	 .	 .	 in	 fact	 he
looked	astonished,	just	as	you	do	now	.	.	.’
Akbar	heard	Mayala	cry	out	behind	him	but	he	didn’t	take	his	eyes	off	Adham	Khan.	‘Get	back	inside
your	room,	Mayala,’	he	yelled	without	turning	his	head.	‘Stay	there	until	I	tell	you	it’s	safe.	It	seems	there
is	a	mad	dog	loose.’
‘But	Majesty	.	.	.’
‘Now!’	 He	 heard	 her	 door	 slam	 shut.	 At	 almost	 the	 same	 moment	 came	 the	 sounds	 of	 shouting	 and
running	feet	approaching	the	haram.	The	other	guards,	who	must	have	fled	when	Adham	Khan	burst	in,
had	returned	with	reinforcements	and	now	came	spilling	into	the	courtyard.	Among	them	was	an	elderly
servant,	 Rafiq,	 who	 had	 once	 served	 Humayun	 and	 was	 now	 Hamida’s	 steward.	 The	 old	 man	 was
brandishing	a	scimitar	that	he	must	have	grabbed	from	somewhere.	At	one	signal	from	Akbar	they	would
have	 fallen	 on	 Adham	 Khan	 and	 cut	 him	 down,	 but	 Akbar	 had	 no	 intention	 of	 allowing	 anyone	 else	 to
inflict	death	on	the	milk-brother	who	had	broken	the	sacred	bond	between	them.	It	was	his	duty	and	he
would	not	shirk	it.	He	waved	the	guards	back.
‘Just	now,	you	were	calling	on	me	to	fight	you.	Very	well.	Rafiq,	give	me	that	scimitar.’
Keeping	a	wary	eye	on	the	slightly	swaying	figure	of	Adham	Khan,	Rafiq	tottered	towards	Akbar,	who
took	the	weapon	and	made	a	few	swishing	passes	through	the	air.	The	cumbersome	hilt	was	old-fashioned
and	uncomfortable,	but	the	curved	blade	was	sharp	and	bright.	He	knotted	the	length	of	cloth	Rafiq	was
offering	him	tight	round	his	naked	waist.
‘All	 right	 then,	 Adham	 Khan.	 We	 each	 have	 a	 sword	 and	 a	 dagger,	 so	 we	 are	 equal.	 Let’s	 see	 what
happens,	shall	we?’
Akbar	 moved	 a	 few	 paces	 towards	 Adham	 Khan	 and	 paused,	 hoping	 to	 tempt	 him	 to	 rush	 him.	 But
though	 his	 milk-brother’s	 wits	 had	 been	 slowed	 by	 drink	 he	 was	 still	 sufficiently	 master	 of	 himself,	 it
seemed,	 not	 to	 be	 lured	 into	 an	 early	 blunder.	 As	 they	 began	 slowly	 to	 circle	 one	 another	 Akbar	 was
reminded	 of	 the	 hunt,	 when	 he	 tried	 to	 predict	 what	 his	 prey	 would	 do	 next.	 Suddenly	 seeing	 an
opportunity,	he	flung	himself	forward,	flicking	his	scimitar	to	catch	the	pommel	of	Adham	Khan’s	sword
and	then	giving	a	quick	twist	that	sent	the	sword	spinning	from	the	other’s	grip	to	fall	with	a	clatter	on	the
stone	ground.	It	was	a	Persian	trick	Bairam	Khan	had	taught	him	long	ago.	Adham	Khan	dodged	hastily
back	before	Akbar	could	slice	at	him	with	the	scimitar.	Then	he	raised	his	dagger	and	flung	it	at	Akbar,
who	swerved,	but	not	quickly	enough,	and	felt	the	tip	of	the	blade	slice	across	his	cheekbone.	With	warm
blood	dripping	down	his	neck,	Akbar	threw	his	own	sword	and	dagger	aside	and	taking	three	giant	steps
hurled	 himself	 on	 his	 milk-brother.	 As	 they	 went	 crashing	 to	 the	 ground,	 he	 could	 feel	 Adham	 Khan

struggling	 to	 wriggle	 from	 underneath	 him	 and	 grasping	 a	 handful	 of	 his	 milk-brother’s	 long	 hair	 he
banged	his	head	hard	once,	then	again,	against	the	paving	stones.	Then,	leaning	back,	he	smashed	his	right
fist	so	hard	into	his	face	he	felt	the	snapping	of	a	cheekbone.	‘You	batcha-i-lada,	you	son	of	a	bitch	.	.	.’
he	yelled.
A	bubbling,	gasping	noise	was	coming	from	Adham	Khan	as	Akbar	hauled	him	to	his	feet,	and	he	could
taste	his	own	blood,	metallic	and	salty,	in	his	mouth.	As	he	looked	at	the	mangled,	drooping	figure	of	his
milk-brother	–	only	upright	because	he	was	holding	him	–	he	felt	an	almost	overwhelming	urge	to	pound
him	 to	 a	 lifeless	 pulp,	 so	 deep	 was	 his	 sense	 of	 hurt	 and	 betrayal.	 But	 losing	 control	 was	 not	 how	 an
emperor	should	behave.	Stepping	back,	he	reluctantly	let	go	of	Adham	Khan,	who	crumpled	to	the	ground.
‘Before	I	have	you	executed	do	you	have	anything	you	wish	to	say?’
Adham	Khan	slowly	raised	his	shattered	face.	‘You	may	have	triumphed	now,	but	I	have	been	making	a
fool	of	you	for	months.	Those	stupid	little	bitches,	of	course	it	was	me	who	took	them	–	why	should	you
always	get	the	best?	I	killed	them	so	they	wouldn’t	tell.’
‘And	Bairam	Khan?’
‘What	do	you	think?’	Adham	Khan’s	bloodied	features	could	still	approximate	a	triumphant	sneer.
That	 would	 be	 his	 last	 laugh,	 Akbar	 thought	 as	 rage	 and	 anger	 at	 his	 own	 gullibility	 and	 foolishness
overcame	him.	‘Guards.	Take	him	and	fling	him	from	the	walls.’
He	 watched	 as	 two	 guards	 dragged	 Adham	 Khan	 by	 his	 ankles	 across	 the	 courtyard,	 leaving	 a	 long
smear	of	blood	on	the	flagstones.	Grunting	with	effort,	they	hauled	him	up	a	shallow	flight	of	steps	in	one
corner	that	led	on	to	a	narrow	walkway	with	a	low	balustrade	overlooking	a	sandstone	terrace.	The	drop
was	about	twenty	feet.	Akbar	watched	unmoved	as,	letting	go	of	Adham	Khan’s	ankles,	they	gripped	him
under	the	armpits	and	heaved	him	over	head	first.	Akbar	heard	a	thud.	The	guards	peered	over.	‘Majesty,
he’s	still	moving.’
‘Then	haul	him	up	again	by	his	hair	and	throw	him	down	a	second	time.’
The	soldiers	ran	off	down	a	sloping	passageway	leading	to	the	terrace.	It	was	some	minutes	before	they
reappeared,	 dragging	 Adham	 Khan’s	 still	 feebly	 jerking	 body	 by	 his	 long	 dark	 hair.	 This	 time	 Akbar
followed	 them	 up	 to	 the	 ledge	 and	 watched	 as	 once	 again	 his	 milk-brother	 was	 shoved	 over	 the
balustrade.	This	time,	as	Adham	Khan’s	skull	hit	the	hard	stone	it	cracked	like	a	ripe	nut,	sending	pinkgrey	brains	spewing	out.	Within	seconds,	a	kite	dropped	from	the	blue	sky	to	peck	at	the	corpse.	Soon	a
dozen	were	feeding	on	what	remained	of	the	companion	of	Akbar’s	boyhood.
He	didn’t	stay	to	watch.	The	full	impact	of	what	had	happened	had	struck	him.	How	could	he	have	been
so	 stupid?	 How	 could	 he	 have	 let	 others	 see	 his	 stupidity?	 Despite	 the	 heat,	 he	 felt	 cold	 and	 was
beginning	to	shake.	His	mind	was	full	of	the	one	question	he	had	wanted	to	ask	Adham	Khan	but	hadn’t	–
perhaps	because	he	feared	the	answer.	How	much	had	Maham	Anga,	the	woman	who	had	given	him	her
milk	and	protected	him	when	he	was	alone	and	vulnerable,	known	of	her	son’s	doings?	The	courtyard	was
crowded	 with	 people	 now	 –	 the	 women	 had	 come	 out	 of	 the	 chambers	 where	 they’d	 taken	 refuge	 and
were	discussing	with	the	haram	guards	and	attendants	the	extraordinary	incident	that	had	just	taken	place.
Glancing	round,	Akbar	saw	Mayala	watching	him	from	the	doorway	of	her	apartment,	her	usually	smiling
face	 strained	 and	 anxious.	 He’d	 have	 liked	 to	 go	 and	 reassure	 her	 that	 all	 was	 well,	 but	 it	 wasn’t,	 and
there	were	things	he	must	do.	‘Fetch	my	robe,’	he	shouted	to	an	attendant,	keeping	his	voice	as	steady	as
he	could.
A	quarter	of	an	hour	later,	his	mind	still	in	turmoil,	Akbar	made	his	way	to	Maham	Anga’s	apartments.
He	 had	 already	 detailed	 members	 of	 his	 personal	 bodyguard	 to	 search	 them	 and	 then	 to	 stand	 guard
outside	until	he	arrived.	Given	his	semi-drunken	state,	Adham	Khan	had	probably	been	acting	alone	and
on	impulse,	even	if	his	grievances	and	jealousies	had	been	festering	for	a	long	time.	Nevertheless,	it	was

as	 well	 to	 be	 certain	 no	 further	 traitors	 lurked	 there.	 Outside,	 he	 received	 the	 brief	 salutation	 of	 the
captain	of	his	bodyguard.	‘We	have	searched	the	chambers.	It	is	safe	for	you	to	enter,	Majesty.’
‘And	you’ve	said	nothing	of	what	has	occurred?’
‘No,	Majesty.’
‘Did	she	mention	her	son?’
‘Again,	no,	Majesty.’
As	the	guards	swung	the	double	doors	open	to	admit	him,	Akbar	knew	the	task	ahead	of	him	was	far
more	distasteful	than	any	battle.	Given	what	the	captain	of	his	guard	had	said,	it	seemed	that	Maham	Anga
didn’t	 yet	 know	 of	 his	 fight	 with	 Adham	 Khan	 or	 of	 her	 son’s	 summary	 execution	 or	 the	 reasons	 for	 it,
though	 it	 would	 have	 taken	 a	 fleet-footed	 attendant	 only	 five	 minutes	 to	 carry	 the	 news	 to	 her.	 Maham
Anga	 was	 standing	 in	 the	 middle	 of	 the	 chamber	 in	 which	 in	 happier	 times	 she	 had	 held	 parties	 and
celebrations,	and	where	by	the	soft	light	of	oil	lamps	she	had	fondly	told	him	the	stories	of	his	youth	that
never	bored	him.	Her	expression	now	was	anxious.
‘Akbar,	what	is	going	on?	Why	am	I	suddenly	a	prisoner?’	Her	clear	brown	eyes	fixed	on	his	face	were
genuinely	puzzled.	To	give	himself	strength,	he	let	his	mind	dwell	for	a	moment	on	the	bloody	corpse	of
the	 murdered	 Atga	 Khan,	 which	 he	 had	 inspected	 just	 a	 few	 minutes	 earlier	 and	 was	 even	 now	 being
washed	in	camphor	water	and	readied	for	burial.
‘Maham	Anga,	all	my	life	you	have	been	as	a	mother	to	me.	What	I	have	to	say	isn’t	easy,	so	let	me	be
direct.	 An	 hour	 ago	 your	 son	 murdered	 my	 chief	 quartermaster,	 Atga	 Khan,	 then	 burst	 armed	 into	 the
haram	intending	to	kill	me	also.’
‘No.’	She	spoke	so	softly	that	the	one	word	was	almost	inaudible.	Blindly	she	reached	out	to	catch	at
something	to	support	her,	but	her	flailing	hand	caught	against	a	dish	of	marzipan	sweetmeats	and	sent	it
crashing	to	the	floor.
‘There	is	more.	Adham	Khan	challenged	me	to	combat.	I	defeated	him	in	a	fair	fight	and	then	I	ordered
his	immediate	death	–	the	death	of	a	traitor.’
Maham	 Anga	 was	 shaking	 her	 head	 slowly	 from	 side	 to	 side	 and	 making	 a	 pitiful	 sound	 between	 a
whimper	and	a	wail.	‘Tell	me	he	isn’t	dead,’	she	sobbed	at	last.
Akbar	came	closer.	‘I	had	no	choice.	I	had	him	flung	headlong	from	the	walls.	Not	only	did	I	have	the
evidence	 of	 my	 own	 eyes	 but	 he	 boasted	 to	 me	 of	 his	 other	 crimes	 –	 the	 girls	 destined	 for	 my	 haram
whom	he	seized	from	spite	and	jealousy	and	then	had	killed.	Even	worse,	he	taunted	me	that	he	was	the
author	of	Bairam	Khan’s	death.	Such	arrogance	and	ambition	could	not	go	unpunished	.	.	.	what	else	could
I	do	but	have	him	executed?’
‘No!’	This	time	the	word	was	a	shriek.	‘I	gave	you	my	milk	when	you	were	a	baby.	I	risked	my	life	to
protect	you	when	your	uncle	ordered	you	to	be	exposed	to	cannon	and	musket	fire	on	the	walls	of	Kabul.
And	you	betray	me	by	slaughtering	my	only	son	–	your	own	milk-brother!	I	have	nourished	a	viper	at	my
bosom,	a	devil.’	Maham	Anga	fell	to	the	floor,	clawing	hysterically	first	at	the	rich	red	rug,	then	at	Akbar,
ripping	at	his	calves	with	her	nails	and	drawing	blood	as	red	as	the	carpet.
‘Guards!’	Akbar	could	not	bear	to	lay	hands	on	her	himself.	‘Be	gentle	with	her.	She	is	hysterical	with
shock	 and	 grief.’	 Two	 of	 his	 men	 pulled	 Maham	 Anga	 away	 from	 him.	 In	 a	 moment	 she	 broke	 free	 but
made	no	further	attempt	to	attack	him.	Instead,	she	just	knelt	there,	rocking	back	and	forth,	arms	wrapped
tightly	around	herself.
‘Maham	Anga,	I	must	ask	you	this.	Did	you	know	anything	of	what	your	son	had	done	–	of	his	plans	to
kill	me?’
She	looked	up	at	him	through	her	tangled	hair.	‘No.’
‘And	when	you	advised	me	to	send	Bairam	Khan	on	pilgrimage,	was	that	because	you	and	Adham	Khan

were	jealous	of	his	influence	on	me	and	at	court?’	This	time	Maham	Anga	was	silent.	‘I	insist	you	answer,
and	honestly.	This	is	probably	the	last	time	you	and	I	will	ever	meet.’
‘I	thought	that	with	Bairam	Khan	gone,	you	would	look	to	others	for	advice.’
‘Like	you	and	your	son?’
‘Yes.	My	son	felt	neglected	by	you	and	I	agreed	with	him.’
‘And	did	you	agree	to	Bairam	Khan’s	murder	so	you	could	be	sure	your	rival	was	never	coming	back?’
Despite	his	feelings	for	Maham	Anga,	Akbar	felt	his	anger	welling	up	again.	It	would	be	best	for	them	all
to	bring	this	interview	to	a	swift	close.
At	the	bitter	edge	to	Akbar’s	voice,	his	milk-mother	flinched.	‘I	never	intended	Bairam	Khan’s	death	.	.
.	and	I’m	sure	my	son	was	not	responsible,	whatever	he	may	have	boasted	to	you.’
Nothing	so	blind	as	a	mother’s	love,	Akbar	thought.
‘I	always	loved	you,	Akbar,’	Maham	Anga	said	dully,	as	if	reading	his	mind.
‘Yes,	 but	 you	 loved	 your	 own	 son	 far	 more.	 Maham	 Anga,	 this	 is	 what	 will	 happen.	 Tomorrow,	 you
will	be	taken	from	here	to	the	fort	in	Delhi	where	you	will	live	the	rest	of	your	days	in	seclusion.	I	will
give	you	money	to	build	a	mausoleum	for	your	son.	But	you	will	have	no	further	contact	with	me	or	any	of
my	family.’
As	 he	 turned	 and	 walked	 slowly	 from	 her	 apartments,	 he	 heard	 Maham	 Anga	 break	 into	 fresh	 wails.
From	what	he	could	make	out	from	her	disjointed	words	they	were	not	simply	of	grief	–	she	was	calling
down	 God’s	 curse	 on	 him	 and	 God’s	 blessing	 on	 her	 dead	 son.	 With	 those	 anguished,	 vengeful	 cries
echoing	around	him,	Akbar	made	for	his	own	mother’s	chambers	as	if	he	were	sleep-walking.	Gulbadan
was	with	Hamida	and	he	could	tell	from	their	faces	that	they	already	knew	what	had	happened.
Hamida	took	him	in	her	arms	and	clung	to	him.	‘I	thank	God	you	are	safe.	I	heard	what	that	alachi,	that
devil,	tried	to	do	.	.	.’
‘You	know	that	he	is	dead?	I	had	him	thrown	off	the	battlements.	And	I	am	exiling	Maham	Anga	from
the	court.’
‘She	 too	 deserves	 death.	 As	 your	 milk-mother	 she	 has	 betrayed	 a	 sacred	 trust.’	 Hamida’s	 tone	 was
harsh.
‘No.	 Her	 son’s	 execution	 is	 punishment	 enough.	 And	 how	 can	 I	 forget	 that	 when	 I	 was	 a	 child	 she
risked	her	life	to	save	mine?’
‘I	think	you	are	right	to	spare	Maham	Anga,’	Gulbadan	said	quietly.	‘You	have	dealt	decisively	with	the
real	threat	and	do	not	need	to	revenge	yourself	upon	a	woman.	When	the	mother	of	a	defeated	Hindustani
ruler	 tried	 to	 poison	 your	 grandfather,	 he	 spared	 her	 life	 and	 won	 much	 respect	 for	 it.’	 She	 turned	 to
Hamida.	‘I	understand	what	you	must	be	feeling,	but	when	the	anger,	the	shock,	begin	to	pass	you	will	see
that	I	am	right.’
‘Perhaps,’	 Hamida	 answered	 in	 a	 low	 voice.	 ‘But,	 Gulbadan,	 you	 know	 as	 well	 as	 I	 do	 the
consequences	of	being	too	merciful.	Again	and	again,	my	husband,	your	brother,	forgave	those	he	should
have	executed	and	we	all	suffered	as	a	result.’
‘Humayun	did	what	he	believed	was	right	and	was	surely	a	greater	man	for	it.’
Akbar	was	barely	listening	to	the	two	women.	The	knowledge	of	Adham	Khan’s	treachery	couldn’t	at	a
stroke	 obliterate	 the	 affection	 –	 love	 even	 –	 he	 had	 felt	 for	 his	 milk-brother,	 whose	 mangled,	 bloodied
body	was	now	being	washed	for	burial.	Perhaps	if	he	had	understood	him	better	he	might	have	been	able
to	 prevent	 this	 terrible	 sequence	 of	 events.	 Was	 there	 a	 way	 he	 could	 have	 satisfied	 Adham	 Khan’s
ambitions?	Or	would	his	milk-brother’s	jealousy	always	have	been	a	danger?	In	which	case	he	had	been
naïve	not	to	be	aware	of	it	.	.	.
Suddenly	 he	 realised	 his	 mother	 and	 aunt	 had	 stopped	 talking	 and	 that	 both	 were	 looking	 at	 him.	 ‘I

should	 have	 seen	 what	 was	 coming,’	 he	 said.	 ‘I	 should	 not	 have	 taken	 Maham	 Anga’s	 advice	 about
Bairam	Khan	on	trust	but	asked	myself	what	her	motive	was.	When	Shayzada	named	Adham	Khan	as	her
sisters’	 abductor	 I	 should	 have	 questioned	 him	 more	 rigorously.	 I	 was	 even	 warned	 that	 he	 was
responsible	 for	 the	 death	 of	 Bairam	 Khan	 –	 someone	 who	 knew	 left	 a	 scribbled	 message	 in	 my
apartments.’
‘I	know.	It	was	my	steward.	He	just	told	me.	Though	elderly,	Rafiq	hears	and	sees	much	that	goes	on
though	 people	 do	 not	 realise	 it.	 He	 overheard	 Adham	 Khan	 gloating	 about	 Bairam	 Khan’s	 death	 and
guessed	 he	 was	 responsible.	 Though	 he	 had	 no	 proof,	 he	 wanted	 to	 put	 you	 on	 your	 guard.	 He	 saw	 his
chance	to	enter	your	apartments	and	leave	a	message	scrawled	on	a	piece	of	fabric	he	ripped	from	his
sleeve	because	he	could	find	no	paper	.	.	.	He	said	he	dared	not	sign	it.	Akbar,	he	is	afraid	you	will	punish
him	for	not	having	the	courage	to	tell	you	his	suspicions	to	your	face.’
‘No.	I	am	doubly	in	his	debt.	Just	now	when	I	was	unarmed	in	the	haram	he	gave	me	a	sword.	Tell	him
I	 am	 grateful	 and	 will	 reward	 his	 loyalty.	 The	 fault	 for	 what	 happened	 is	 all	 mine.	 Despite	 Rafiq’s
warning	I	didn’t	press	Adham	Khan.	I	have	been	a	fool	.	.	.’	Akbar	brushed	tears	from	his	eyes	with	the
back	of	his	hand	as	he	continued,	‘I	loved	Adham	Khan	and	Maham	Anga	and	I	believed	they	returned	my
affection.	Now	I	must	learn	to	question	and	doubt	the	motives	of	all	around	me	–	even	those	closest	to	me.
I	must	accept	that	the	role	of	an	emperor	is	a	lonely	one,	and	a	ruler	must	never	give	his	entire	trust	.	.	.’
‘If	 you	 have	 learned	 that	 sad	 truth,	 then	 perhaps	 the	 events	 of	 this	 day	 have	 had	 a	 purpose,’	 said
Hamida,	face	grave.	‘When	you	look	back	many	years	from	now,	you	will	realise	that	this	was	when	you
left	your	youth	behind	and	truly	became	a	man	and	an	emperor.	Whatever	our	position	in	the	world,	life
holds	many	bitter	things.	You	tasted	some	today.	I	pray	you	emerge	the	stronger.’

Part	II
Children	of	Sun,
Moon	and	Fire

Chapter	6

The	Emperor	Rides	Out

he	sky	glowed	with	a	soft	pink	radiance	as	the	sun	dropped,	as	if	nature	herself	wished	to	provide	a
fitting	 backdrop	 for	 the	 ceremony	 about	 to	 be	 enacted,	 Akbar	 thought.	 So	 many	 richly	 coloured
Persian	carpets	covered	the	parade	ground	beneath	the	Agra	fort	that	it	resembled	a	flower	garden.	On
two	 sides	 of	 the	 ground	 his	 commanders	 and	 nobles	 were	 standing	 behind	 gilded	 wooden	 balustrades,
while	on	the	third	were	grouped	some	of	the	rulers	who	had	sworn	allegiance	to	him.	In	the	centre	beneath
a	 green	 silk	 canopy	 stood	 a	 pair	 of	 giant	 golden	 scales	 on	 a	 marble	 platform.	 Two	 saucers	 five	 feet
across,	their	edges	set	with	lozenges	of	smooth-polished	rose	quartz	rimmed	with	pearls,	swayed	on	thick
chains	from	an	oak	frame	eight	feet	high.
Dressed	 in	 stiff	 green	 brocade	 robes,	 with	 a	 long	 necklace	 of	 carved	 emeralds	 round	 his	 neck	 and
diamonds	 flashing	 in	 his	 headdress,	 Akbar	 advanced	 in	 step	 to	 a	 deep,	 rolling	 drumbeat	 towards	 the
scales.	 He	 looked	 with	 satisfaction	 at	 the	 many	 chests	 of	 gems,	 sparkling	 in	 the	 light	 of	 the	 circle	 of
torches	that,	with	dusk	falling,	attendants	had	lit	at	intervals	round	the	platform.	Gold	and	silver	chains	lay
coiled	 like	 snakes,	 while	 coins	 spilled	 from	 wide-necked	 brocade	 sacks	 deliberately	 over-stuffed	 to
demonstrate	his	largesse.	Bags	of	spices	were	piled	on	brass	trays	next	to	jewelled	flasks,	some	of	white
jade,	 containing	 costly	 perfumes	 –	 ambergris,	 frankincense	 and	 aloewood.	 Bales	 of	 embroidered	 silks
subtle	and	delicate	as	butterflies’	wings	shimmered	beside	jewel-bright	lengths	of	fine-woven	pashmina
goat’s	wool.
There	was	also	something	else	–	twenty	large	iron	bars.	Akbar	saw	the	many	curious	glances	directed
towards	them.	As	he	mounted	the	platform	and	approached	the	scales,	the	drummers	ceased	their	rhythmic
thumping	 and	 a	 trumpeter	 sounded	 a	 single	 sharp	 blast.	 At	 this	 signal,	 attendants	 picked	 up	 the	 bars,
carried	them	over	to	the	scales	and	stacked	them	on	one	of	the	giant	saucers,	which	quickly	dipped	to	the
ground	beneath	the	weight.
Since	Adham	Khan’s	death	nearly	two	years	ago,	he	had	spent	much	time	reflecting	on	how	and	why	he
had	 failed	 to	 foresee	 Adham	 Khan’s	 treachery	 and	 how	 he	 could	 avoid	 new	 conspiracies	 among	 his
nobles.	He	knew	that	one	reason	for	his	reluctance	to	suspect	Adham	Khan	and	Maham	Anga	had	been
their	 closeness	 to	 him	 since	 childhood.	 With	 Bairam	 Khan	 dead	 there	 was	 no	 one	 left	 in	 a	 similar
position,	and	he	would	not	let	anyone	get	so	close	in	future,	or	trust	anyone	so	completely.	He	must	rely	on
his	own	inner	resources.	But	even	if	Adham	Khan’s	and	Maham	Anga’s	intimate	ties	to	him	partly	excused
his	 blindness	 towards	 their	 machinations,	 he	 had	 also	 been	 complacent,	 so	 confident	 in	 his	 power	 and
position	that	he	thought	nobody	would	challenge	them.
A	solution	as	to	how	he	might	minimise	the	chances	of	future	unrest	had	come	to	him	almost	by	accident
as	one	of	his	qorchis	read	to	him	from	his	grandfather’s	memoirs.	Among	all	Babur’s	wise	words,	two
passages	in	particular	had	caught	his	attention:	‘War	and	booty	keep	men	true’	and	‘Be	generous	to	your
supporters.	If	they	know	they	have	more	to	gain	from	you	than	from	anyone	else	they	will	stay	loyal.’	After
all,	if	anyone	had	understood	how	to	survive	it	had	been	Babur,	and	he	could	learn	from	him.	That	was
why	he	had	summoned	his	nobles	here	today	–	to	tell	them	that	very	soon	he	would	be	launching	wars	of

T

conquest	 that	 would	 fill	 the	 imperial	 treasuries	 to	 overflowing	 with	 gold	 and	 jewels,	 and	 also	 to	 give
them	a	taste	of	the	rewards	that	were	to	come.	And,	thanks	to	Gulbadan	who	had	witnessed	it	during	the
early	days	of	his	father’s	reign	and	suggested	it,	he	had	found	exactly	the	right	occasion	for	his	show	of
magnificence	and	ambition	–	a	weighing	ceremony.	To	his	great	satisfaction,	a	search	of	the	Agra	treasure
vaults	had	produced	the	very	scales	Humayun,	as	a	young	emperor	himself,	had	had	made.	Akbar	allowed
himself	a	brief	smile,	then	raised	his	hands	for	silence.
‘Like	 my	 father	 before	 me	 I	 have	 decided	 to	 revive	 the	 ancient	 custom	 of	 the	 rulers	 of	 Hindustan	 of
being	 publicly	 weighed	 against	 precious	 stuffs.	 I	 shall	 hold	 this	 ceremony	 twice	 a	 year	 –	 on	 my	 lunar
birthday,	 as	 today,	 and	 again	 on	 my	 solar	 birthday.	 After	 the	 weighing,	 the	 treasure	 will	 be	 distributed
amongst	those	invited	–	as	you	have	been	today	–	to	witness	it.	To	show	my	special	regard	for	you,	I	wish
on	this	first	occasion	to	give	you	more	than	the	mere	equivalent	of	my	bodyweight.	These	iron	bars	weigh
twice	as	much	as	I.’	Akbar	waited	a	moment	to	allow	his	words	to	sink	in,	then	sat	down	cross-legged	on
the	saucer	next	to	the	pile	of	iron.
Akbar’s	 attendants	 at	 once	 began	 to	 load	 the	 other	 saucer,	 beginning	 with	 the	 most	 precious	 objects.
Ten	chests	of	gems	had	been	stacked	high	before	the	saucer	bearing	Humayun	began	to	rise	slowly	and
shudderingly	from	the	ground.	The	silence	was	intense	and	Akbar	sensed	every	eye	fixed	upon	him,	every
mind	calculating	what	his	individual	share	of	the	spoils	might	be.	The	Moghuls	had	come	a	long	way,	he
reflected,	 as	 the	 jewels	 were	 replaced	 by	 the	 gold	 and	 silver	 chains	 and	 then	 by	 the	 sacks	 of	 gold.	 In
former	 days,	 the	 moment	 for	 reward	 had	 come	 immediately	 after	 battle	 with	 the	 bloodied,	 still	 warm
bodies	of	the	Moghuls’	foes	as	witnesses.	Each	clan	chieftain	had	presented	his	shield	to	be	piled	with
booty	which	he	then	dragged	off	to	share	with	his	men.	But	those	times,	with	their	origins	in	the	Moghuls’
nomadic	 past,	 were	 over.	 He	 was	 Emperor	 of	 Hindustan	 and	 must	 provide	 his	 followers	 with	 more
rewards,	 not	 just	 for	 winning	 new	 territories	 by	 their	 feats	 in	 battle	 but	 also	 for	 retaining	 them	 through
good	government.
The	 distribution	 of	 the	 rich	 gifts	 took	 place	 as	 soon	 as	 the	 weighing	 was	 over.	 With	 the	 help	 of	 his
comptroller	of	the	household,	Jauhar,	Akbar	had	calculated	what	each	man	should	receive	and	Jauhar	had
carefully	recorded	his	wishes	in	his	ledger.	Akbar	watched	as	Jauhar	called	out	name	after	name	and	his
nobles,	commanders	and	allies	stepped	up	to	claim	their	allotted	share	of	money	and	jewels	and	of	soft
silks	 and	 pashmina	 wools	 for	 their	 wives	 and	 concubines,	 and	 even	 gifts	 for	 their	 children:	 almonds
wrapped	in	gold	leaf,	toy	Moghul	soldiers	–	horsemen,	archers	and	musketeers	–	and	female	dolls	with
tiny	silver	earrings,	necklaces	and	bangles.	Akbar	had	also	ordered	some	treasure	to	be	reserved	and	sent
to	governors	and	officials	of	distant	provinces,	and	for	gifts	of	grain,	rice	and	oil	to	be	distributed	to	the
granaries	 of	 the	 towns	 and	 cities	 of	 the	 empire	 so	 that	 even	 the	 ordinary	 people	 should	 share	 in	 his
generosity.
That	night,	rosewater	bubbled	from	the	fountains	in	the	courtyard	where,	seated	on	a	golden	chair	on	a
velvet-draped	dais,	Akbar	watched	his	guests	feasting	on	the	best	his	accomplished	cooks	could	provide:
whole	sheep	roasted	on	spits	over	fires	of	applewood,	ducks	and	partridges	stuffed	with	dried	fruits	and
nuts	and	simmered	in	copper	pots	of	saffron-spiced	butter	sauce,	and	chickens	marinated	in	yoghourt	and
spices	before	being	baked	in	the	searing	heat	of	the	tandoor	–	the	portable	clay	oven	used	by	a	Moghul
army	 on	 the	 march	 and	 brought	 to	 Hindustan	 in	 Babur’s	 time.	 As	 an	 extra	 touch	 of	 opulence,	 he	 had
ordered	loose	gemstones	to	be	scattered	round	the	edges	of	the	mounds	of	zard	birinj	–	rice	mixed	with
butter,	 raisins,	 dried	 cherries,	 almonds,	 pistachios,	 ginger	 and	 cinnamon	 –	 that	 were	 to	 be	 served	 to
accompany	the	rich	meats.	He	had	even	commanded	that	fragrant	musk-melons	and	sweet-juiced	grapes
be	packed	in	ice	and	sent	down	through	the	Khyber	Pass	from	Kabul.	The	fruit	had	arrived	two	days	ago
in	excellent	condition.

Akbar	waited	until	most	had	finished	and	were	wiping	their	lips	before	rising	from	his	chair.	Now	was
the	moment	to	tell	them	what	he	was	planning.	As	he	saw	all	the	flushed,	upturned	faces	turned	towards
him,	a	confidence	possessed	him	that	they	would	follow	him	anywhere.
‘There	 is	 something	 I	 wish	 to	 say	 to	 you.	 It	 is	 forty	 years	 since	 my	 grandfather	 Babur	 conquered
Hindustan	for	the	Moghuls.	An	early	death	denied	him	the	chance	to	expand	his	territories,	just	as	it	also
denied	 my	 own	 father	 that	 opportunity.	 But	 I	 am	 young	 and	 the	 warrior	 blood	 of	 my	 ancestors	 beats
strongly	in	my	veins.	It	tells	me	my	destiny	is	to	forge	an	empire	that	will	endure	–	an	empire	that	cannot
be	lost	by	a	single	battle	but	will	be	the	wonder	of	the	world	for	centuries	to	come.
‘The	 way	 to	 achieve	 that	 is	 through	 conquest.	 Today	 I	 conferred	 on	 you	 some	 of	 the	 wealth	 of	 our
empire,	but	it	was	only	a	tiny	fraction	of	the	gold	and	glory	I	will	give	you	in	the	years	to	come	as,	with
your	help,	I	push	back	the	boundaries	of	the	Moghul	empire.	My	dominions	will	stretch	from	east	to	west,
from	sea	to	sea.	Southwards,	it	will	extend	beyond	the	great	plateau	of	the	Deccan	to	the	diamond	mines
of	 Golconda,	 the	 brilliant	 gems	 from	 which	 will	 blaze	 from	 my	 throne	 and	 adorn	 your	 wives	 and
concubines.	 These	 are	 not	 idle	 boasts.	 Here,	 before	 you	 all,	 I	 pledge	 to	 vanquish	 new	 lands	 –	 not	 just
those	 of	 petty	 chiefs	 along	 our	 borders	 who	 think	 they	 can	 defy	 us,	 but	 the	 rulers	 of	 rich	 and	 mighty
kingdoms.	If	they	will	bend	their	proud	necks	to	Moghul	domination	they	will	find	mercy,	honour	and	a
share	 in	 our	 greatness.	 But	 if	 they	 resist,	 my	 armies	 will	 crush	 the	 bones	 of	 their	 soldiers	 to	 dust	 and
smash	their	palaces	and	fortresses	to	ruins.
‘So	I	say,	prepare	for	war!	The	first	who	will	feel	our	power	is	Rana	Udai	Singh	of	Mewar,	son	of
Rana	 Sanga	 whom	 my	 grandfather	 Babur	 defeated	 forty	 years	 ago	 and	 who	 is	 just	 as	 treacherous.	 The
ranas	 of	 Mewar	 claim	 to	 be	 the	 greatest	 of	 all	 the	 Rajputs.	 While	 many	 other	 Rajput	 princes	 long	 ago
declared	themselves	to	be	my	loyal	vassals,	Udai	Singh	has	equivocated,	seeking	special	privileges	and
finding	 reasons	 not	 to	 come	 to	 court.	 Now	 he	 is	 openly	 showing	 his	 hostility.	 His	 warriors	 recently
attacked	 a	 caravan	 of	 Moghul	 merchants	 making	 for	 the	 coast	 of	 Gujarat.	 In	 reply	 to	 my	 demand	 for
compensation	Udai	Singh	has	returned	an	insulting	message:	“You	are	the	offspring	of	horse-thieves	from
the	barbarian	north	while	our	descent	is	from	the	god	Rama	and	through	him	the	sun,	moon	and	fire.	You
have	no	authority	over	me.”
‘He	will	learn	that	I	have.	In	three	months’	time,	when	we	have	completed	our	preparations,	I	will	ride
at	the	head	of	my	armies	to	punish	him	and	you	here	tonight	will	play	your	glorious	part!’	As	a	great	cheer
enveloped	him,	Akbar	raised	his	emerald-inlaid	jade	drinking	cup.	‘To	victory!’
Akbar	narrowed	his	eyes	against	the	sun	as,	standing	with	Ahmed	Khan	on	a	balcony	of	the	Agra	fort	eight
weeks	later,	he	watched	a	troop	of	cavalry	galloping	in	single	file	along	the	dry	mud	bank	of	the	Jumna
river.	 A	 row	 of	 twenty	 spears	 had	 been	 stuck	 into	 the	 ground	 at	 five-yard	 intervals.	 As	 each	 rider
approached,	without	lessening	his	breakneck	pace	he	expertly	swerved	his	horse	between	them.	Reaching
the	last	of	the	spears	and	still	retaining	perfect	balance	and	control,	each	man	rose	in	his	stirrups	to	hurl
his	steel-tipped	lance	at	a	straw	target	set	up	some	ten	yards	ahead.	Every	man	hit	his	target	spot	on.
Akbar	grunted.	‘Impressive.	How	soon	can	the	army	be	ready	to	ride	out,	d’you	think?’
‘Within	 another	 month,	 as	 we	 planned	 –	 perhaps	 sooner,	 although	 some	 of	 our	 gunners	 need	 further
training	 in	 loading	 the	 new	 large	 cannon	 with	 stronger	 barrels	 our	 Turkish	 armourers	 have	 produced	 in
our	 foundries.	 We’re	 also	 still	 waiting	 for	 those	 supplies	 of	 extra	 muskets	 we	 ordered	 from	 the	 skilled
gunsmiths	of	Lahore.	To	increase	their	range	they	can	be	loaded	with	at	least	twice	as	much	gunpowder	as
our	existing	ones	–	even	to	the	muzzle,	I’m	told	–	without	risk	of	bursting.	When	we	have	them	we	will
have	 the	 best	 equipped	 as	 well	 as	 the	 largest	 army	 within	 thousands	 of	 miles,	 stonger	 even	 than	 the

Persian	shah’s.’
While	a	soldier	yanked	the	line	of	spears	from	the	mud,	the	riders	re-formed.	Now	their	task	was	to
gallop	 up	 to	 a	 row	 of	 clay	 pots	 lying	 on	 their	 sides	 and	 without	 losing	 pace	 to	 scoop	 one	 up	 on	 their
spear-tip.	This	time	the	performance	wasn’t	so	perfect.	One	rider	misjudged	the	distance,	embedding	his
spear	in	the	mud	and	somersaulting	from	the	saddle	to	land	painfully	on	the	hard-baked	ground.
Akbar	 smiled.	 He	 too	 had	 bruises.	 He	 was	 training	 every	 day	 now,	 firing	 shot	 after	 shot	 from	 his
musket	and	practising	with	sword,	flail	and	battleaxe	until	they	felt	like	living	extensions	of	his	own	body.
He	 was	 also	 joining	 in	 wrestling	 bouts	 with	 his	 officers.	 At	 first	 they	 had	 treated	 him	 with	 too	 much
respect,	 reluctant	 to	 fling	 their	 emperor	 into	 the	 dust,	 but	 his	 skill	 and	 speed	 and	 the	 challenges	 he	 had
roared	at	them	had	quickly	conquered	such	inhibitions.
He	glanced	up	at	the	rapidly	crimsoning	sky.	In	another	half-hour	it	would	be	growing	dark.	‘Ahmed
Khan,	I	would	like	to	play	polo	with	those	men	down	on	the	riverbank.’
‘But	the	light	is	fading.’
‘Wait	and	see.’
Half	 an	 hour	 later,	 dressed	 in	 simple	 tunic	 and	 trousers	 and	 mounted	 on	 a	 small,	 muscular	 chestnut
horse	 with	 white	 fetlocks,	 Akbar	 trotted	 out	 of	 the	 fort,	 across	 the	 parade	 ground	 and	 down	 to	 the
riverbank.	Behind	him	followed	attendants,	some	carrying	palas	–	wooden	balls	made	from	dark	timber	–
and	polo	sticks	while	four	staggered	under	the	weight	of	a	brazier	of	glowing	charcoals	supported	on	two
wooden	poles.	As	he	reached	the	bank,	Akbar	kicked	his	horse	into	a	canter	and	rode	up	to	the	horsemen.
Seeing	their	emperor,	they	prepared	to	dismount	and	make	their	salutations.
‘No.	Stay	in	the	saddle.	I	want	you	to	take	part	in	an	experiment,’	Akbar	said.
As	 inky	 purple	 shadows	 stole	 over	 the	 river,	 he	 ordered	 his	 attendants	 to	 distribute	 the	 polo	 sticks,
mark	out	goals	with	torches	on	either	side	and	finally	place	one	of	the	wooden	balls	in	the	brazier.	Almost
at	once	the	ball	began	to	smoulder,	but	even	after	four	or	five	minutes	it	hadn’t	burst	into	flames.	Akbar
smiled.	 So	 the	 story	 about	 Timur	 was	 true.	 On	 several	 evenings	 since	 announcing	 his	 intention	 to	 go	 to
war,	he	had	asked	his	qorchi	to	read	him	accounts	of	Timur’s	exploits	in	case	there	was	anything	he	could
learn	from	his	great	ancestor.	One	description	had	diverted	him	from	thoughts	of	strategy	to	those	of	sport.
It	told	how,	by	chance,	Timur	had	discovered	that	the	hard	timber	of	the	wormwood	tree	smouldered	for
many	hours.	He	had	ordered	his	men	to	play	polo	through	the	night	with	glowing	balls	of	wormwood	to
harden	and	prepare	them	for	battle.	Ever	since,	Akbar	had	been	eager	to	try	it	for	himself.
‘Throw	the	ball	on	the	ground,’	he	ordered.	As	one	of	his	attendants	lifted	the	ball	from	the	brazier	with
a	 pair	 of	 long,	 curved	 tongs,	 Akbar	 kicked	 his	 horse	 forward	 and	 took	 a	 swing	 at	 the	 glowing	 sphere.
‘Let’s	play,’	he	yelled.	Soon	the	dark	riverbank	echoed	to	the	beat	of	hooves	and	the	shouts	of	laughing
men,	and	the	game	lasted	until	the	moon	had	risen	high,	turning	the	Jumna’s	muddy	waters	to	liquid	silver.
Later	that	night,	as	a	hakim	massaged	his	stiffening	muscles	with	warm	oil,	Akbar	again	thought	about
Timur	and	why	he	had	never	once	been	defeated.	He	had	favoured	the	shock	attack,	the	hit-and-run	raid.
That	was	how	he	had	smashed	his	way	across	Asia,	allowing	no	physical	or	human	obstacle,	however
mighty,	to	blunt	his	impetus.	Crossing	the	frozen	Hindu	Kush	he	had	had	himself	lowered	down	a	sheer
cliff	of	ice	and	brushed	off	attacks	by	cannibal	tribes	as	easily	as	if	they’d	been	fleas	to	be	shaken	from
his	fur-lined	robes.
Timur’s	 tactics	 might	 not	 be	 appropriate	 for	 dealing	 with	 a	 modern	 enemy	 like	 Rana	 Udai	 Singh,
equipped	 with	 cannon	 and	 entrenched	 behind	 the	 high	 walls	 of	 his	 desert	 fortress,	 Akbar	 thought.	 But
Timur’s	self-belief,	his	absolute	determination	to	win	and	never	to	cede	the	initiative	or	be	deflected	from
his	goals,	were	as	relevant	now	as	two	hundred	years	ago.	The	desire	to	emulate	his	warrior	ancestor	sent
a	restless	energy	burning	through	Akbar’s	veins	so	that	he	could	hardly	lie	still	beneath	the	hakim’s	strong

fingers.	But	it	would	not	be	long	before	the	war	drums	boomed	out	from	the	gatehouse	of	the	Agra	fort	and
the	Moghul	armies	advanced	southwest	into	the	pale	orange	deserts	of	Rajasthan	towards	Mewar	and	its
arrogant	rana.	His	mother	had	conjured	those	deserts	for	him	so	vividly	that	Akbar	could	almost	taste	the
dry,	gritty	air	and	hear	the	harsh	shrieks	of	the	peacocks	that	inhabited	these	desolate	reaches.	It	was	not
surprising	Hamida	should	remember	them	so	well.	She	had	given	birth	to	Akbar	in	a	small	desert	town	in
Rajasthan	while	she	and	his	father	had	been	fugitives	from	a	Rajput	king	who	had	pledged	to	rip	Akbar
living	 from	 her	 womb	 and	 send	 the	 unborn	 child	 as	 a	 gift	 to	 Sher	 Shah,	 the	 invader	 who	 had	 robbed
Humayun	of	his	throne.
That	Rajput	leader	was	dead,	but	the	humbling	of	Udai	Singh	was	long	overdue	and	subduing	Mewar,
which	 straddled	 the	 route	 between	 Agra	 and	 the	 south,	 made	 sound	 strategic	 sense.	 In	 his	 mind’s	 eye,
Akbar	 already	 saw	 his	 armies	 battering	 down	 the	 gates	 of	 the	 great	 fort	 of	 Chittorgarh,	 capital	 of	 Udai
Singh’s	family	for	over	eight	hundred	years	and	symbol	of	their	overweening	arrogance.	Defeating	Udai
Singh,	 head	 of	 the	 most	 powerful	 Rajput	 ruling	 house,	 would	 make	 Akbar	 so	 feared	 –	 and	 respected	 –
across	the	Indian	subcontinent	that	none	would	dare	challenge	him.

Chapter	7

Saffron	Warriors

n	 the	 early	 morning	 of	 a	 cloudless	 December	 day	 Akbar	 stood	 with	 Ahmed	 Khan	 at	 his	 side	 looking
towards	the	Rana	of	Mewar’s	great	fortress-city	of	Chittorgarh.	Its	sandstone	walls,	over	three	miles
long,	 sat	 high	 on	 a	 vast	 rocky	 outcrop	 soaring	 five	 hundred	 feet	 sheer	 from	 the	 dry	 Rajasthani	 plains
below.	Enclosed	within	them	were	temples,	palaces,	houses	and	markets,	as	well	as	military	positions.
To	Akbar’s	acute	frustration,	he	and	his	forces	had	already	been	besieging	the	city	for	six	weeks	to	no
great	 effect.	 Initially	 he	 had	 been	 pleased	 with	 the	 progress	 they	 had	 made.	 They	 had	 surrounded
Chittorgarh	completely,	cut	off	all	food	supplies	and	captured	or	killed	any	foraging	parties	the	Rajputs
had	sent	out.	They	had	gleaned	some	useful	information	from	one	of	their	captives,	a	ragged	scrawny	child
of	about	ten	whom	they	had	apprehended	with	his	two	elder	brothers	as	they	climbed	down	the	exposed
rock	 face	 from	 the	 fortress’s	 outer	 walls	 in	 a	 desperate	 search	 for	 food.	 When	 Akbar’s	 soldiers	 had
separated	the	child	from	his	brothers	and	tempted	him	with	a	piece	of	freshly	roasted	mutton	he	had	told
them,	 after	 much	 cajoling,	 that	 Rana	 Udai	 Singh	 did	 not	 command	 the	 defending	 army	 himself	 but	 had
appointed	 two	 of	 his	 young	 generals	 –	 Jai	 Mal	 and	 Patti	 by	 name	 –	 to	 the	 task.	 The	 rana	 himself,
according	to	the	boy,	was	somewhere	in	the	Aravalli	range	of	hills	where	he	was	said	to	be	building	a
new	capital	to	be	named	Udaipur	after	him.
The	 reaction	 of	 his	 older	 brothers	 when	 they	 had	 found	 out	 from	 the	 child	 what	 he	 had	 revealed
underlined	the	strictness	of	the	Rajput	code.	They	had	attacked	the	boy	and	would	have	strangled	him	if
they	had	not	been	pulled	away.	They	had	repeated	their	assault	the	next	day,	when	the	three	of	them	had
been	put	to	work	with	some	other	captives	breaking	and	moving	stone	to	be	used	in	improving	Akbar’s
positions.	This	time,	the	eldest	of	the	three	had	hit	his	brother	with	a	sharp	stone,	inflicting	a	great	gash	to
the	 side	 of	 his	 head.	 As	 he	 was	 hauled	 from	 his	 bleeding	 victim	 he	 had	 yelled	 at	 him,	 ‘You	 gave
information	to	the	infidel	attacker.	You	are	no	longer	my	brother.	You	are	not	even	a	Rajput	any	more.’
When	Akbar	had	heard	this	story,	he	had	ordered	the	child	to	be	cleaned	up,	clothed	and	put	to	work	in
the	camp	kitchen,	remarking	as	he	did	so	that	it	was	a	fitting	fate	for	one	whose	desire	for	food	had	led
him	to	help	Chittorgarh’s	attackers.	However,	the	boy	could	not	be	persuaded	to	reveal	anything	about	any
secret	routes	into	Chittorgarh.	Nor	would	older	captives,	even	when	subjected	to	rough	questioning	and
threatened	with	torture.	Probably	there	were	none.
Akbar	and	his	generals	had	continued	the	assault,	but	his	early	hopes	of	success	had	faltered.	He	had
ordered	barrages	of	cannon	shot	to	be	followed	up	by	wave	after	wave	of	attacks,	attempting	to	charge	up
the	single	five-hundred-yard-long	winding	ramp	leading	from	the	plain	to	the	city’s	main	gateway,	which
was	situated	at	the	lowest	point	of	the	summit	of	the	outcrop.	But	none	of	the	attackers	had	even	got	as	far
as	the	bottom	of	the	ramp.	As	soon	as	his	soldiers	had	begun	to	ride	and	run	towards	the	ramp,	Akbar	had
been	 forced	 to	 watch	 powerless	 as	 orange-turbaned	 Rajputs,	 oblivious	 of	 cannon	 and	 musket	 shot,	 had
appeared	on	Chittorgarh’s	crenellated	ramparts	and	shot	down	the	Moghuls	with	musket	balls,	crossbow
bolts	and	a	storm	of	hissing	arrows.	Men	and	horses	had	fallen	dead	or	wounded,	many	on	the	exposed
ground	in	front	of	the	fortress.	To	Akbar’s	dismay,	more	of	his	men	had	been	killed	as	they	bravely	rushed

I

out	to	attempt	to	drag	wounded	comrades	back	under	cover.
Eventually	so	many	lives	had	been	lost	in	such	rescue	attempts	that	Akbar	had	reluctantly	ordered	his
officers	only	to	permit	them	under	cover	of	darkness.	Even	then,	the	Rajputs	had	killed	or	wounded	many,
so	good	seemed	to	be	their	hearing	and	vision	in	the	moonlight.	During	the	days	following	these	attacks,
Akbar	and	his	soldiers	were	tormented	by	the	sounds	of	their	wounded	fellows	crying	out	for	help,	for
water,	and,	in	the	last	extremities,	for	their	mothers	and	for	God	to	release	them	from	their	agonies.	The
constant	 neighing	 of	 wounded	 horses	 was	 almost	 as	 pitiful.	 Black	 flies	 bloated	 from	 feeding	 on	 the
corpses	 clustered	 everywhere	 and	 the	 smell	 from	 the	 putrescent	 bodies	 of	 both	 men	 and	 animals	 so
polluted	 the	 air	 around	 Akbar’s	 camp	 that	 he	 had	 ordered	 fires	 of	 sandalwood	 to	 be	 kept	 burning
constantly	in	an	only	partially	successful	attempt	to	mask	the	sweet,	stomach-turning	stench	of	decay.
Determined	 not	 to	 be	 beaten,	 Akbar	 had	 made	 rounds	 of	 his	 vast	 camp	 morning	 and	 evening	 to
encourage	his	men.	He	had	ordered	small	mounds	or	barricades	of	mud	and	stone	to	be	thrown	up	at	night
to	provide	cover	for	rushes	by	day	at	the	walls.	However,	though	picked	bodies	of	men	had	got	near	to	the
base	of	the	ramp	they	had	been	unable	to	make	any	further	progress	and	had	been	forced	to	retreat	again,
dodging	back	behind	the	mounds	and	dragging	with	them	those	wounded	they	could.
Even	now,	as	Akbar	watched,	a	number	of	his	best	troops	were	assembling	for	yet	another	attack	on	the
ramp	leading	up	to	Chittorgarh’s	gate.	This	time	he	and	his	commanders	had	decided	war	elephants	would
lead	the	assault.	Soldiers	were	already	climbing	into	the	howdahs	on	the	animals’	backs.	To	improve	the
chances	 of	 success,	 he	 had	 had	 the	 elephants	 fitted	 with	 coats	 of	 thicker	 than	 normal	 overlapping	 steel
plates.	The	howdahs	had	been	strengthened	with	heavy	planking	to	give	extra	cover	to	the	musketeers	and
archers	within.	Once	their	howdahs	were	full,	the	mahouts	sitting	behind	the	elephants’	ears	tapped	the
beasts	as	a	signal	for	them	to	rise,	which	they	did	ponderously	beneath	the	weight	of	their	extra	armour
and	the	reinforced	howdahs	and	their	occupants.	Around	them,	the	foot	soldiers	and	horsemen	who	were
to	follow	them	into	the	assault	were	also	forming	up,	taking	advantage	of	what	shelter	the	mud	and	stone
barricades	 provided.	 The	 cavalrymen’s	 horses	 were	 tossing	 their	 heads	 and	 skittering	 uneasily,	 sensing
their	riders’	tension	about	the	attack	to	come.
From	 his	 vantage	 point	 Akbar	 could	 see	 defenders	 massing	 on	 the	 battlements	 of	 Chittorgarh,	 well
aware	that	another	assault	was	about	to	be	launched	on	their	stronghold.	Although	his	preparations	were
beyond	musket	shot,	arrows	fired	from	the	battlements	high	into	the	air	to	secure	maximum	range	began	to
plummet	 from	 the	 skies	 to	 fall	 among	 Akbar’s	 men.	 Many	 had	 lost	 much	 of	 their	 force	 and	 did	 not
penetrate	 the	 armour	 of	 either	 elephants	 or	 men;	 others	 were	 deflected	 by	 shields.	 Some,	 however,
wounded	horses	or	less	well-protected	foot	soldiers.	As	Akbar	watched,	a	black-feathered	arrow	hit	an
officer’s	tall	white	horse	in	the	neck.	It	collapsed,	crimson	blood	staining	its	coat,	and	its	rider,	a	stout
man	wearing	a	domed	helmet,	slid	from	the	saddle	shouting	for	a	replacement.	A	groom	–	an	elderly	man
judging	by	his	white	hair	and	stiff	gait	–	moved	forward,	leading	another	horse,	this	time	a	chestnut,	but	as
he	 did	 so	 another	 of	 the	 defenders’	 lucky	 arrow	 shots	 caught	 him	 in	 the	 chest.	 He	 staggered	 and	 fell,
dropping	 the	 reins	 and	 allowing	 the	 horse	 to	 gallop	 wildly	 out	 from	 the	 Moghul	 ranks	 and	 around	 the
ramparts	of	Chittorgarh.
‘Ahmed	 Khan,	 we	 must	 attack	 now	 if	 our	 assault	 is	 to	 succeed.	 Give	 the	 orders	 for	 the	 elephants	 to
advance	and	for	our	cannon	and	archers	to	provide	covering	fire.	I	will	take	my	place	with	the	first	wave
of	cavalry,	ready	to	follow	up	the	elephants’	attack.’
At	Ahmed	Khan’s	signal,	the	elephants,	encumbered	by	the	extra	weight	they	were	carrying,	began	to
advance,	 moving	 more	 slowly	 than	 usual	 but	 still	 they	 made	 progress	 over	 the	 dry,	 stony	 ground,	 bare
except	for	the	corpses	of	men	and	animals	which	lay	between	them	and	the	bottom	of	the	winding	ramp.
The	defenders’	arrows	seemed	to	have	little	effect,	bouncing	off	the	elephants’	steel	armour	or	sticking

harmlessly	into	the	planking	of	the	howdahs	like	quills	on	a	porcupine.	However,	when	the	attackers	came
within	 musket	 shot,	 Akbar	 saw	 one	 elephant	 pause	 as	 if	 hit	 but	 then	 it	 moved	 forward	 again,	 stoically
plodding	after	its	companions	leaving	a	trail	of	blood	as	it	did	so.	Occasionally	a	soldier	plunged	from	a
howdah,	clearly	wounded,	but	with	growing	excitement	Akbar	realised	the	elephants	were	making	better
progress	than	in	any	previous	attack.	Soon	the	leading	beasts	would	be	at	the	foot	of	the	ramp.	Now	was
the	time	for	him	to	ready	his	horsemen.
‘Follow	 me.	 Chittorgarh	 will	 be	 ours,’	 he	 shouted	 as	 he	 led	 his	 riders	 forward	 at	 the	 trot,	 ready	 to
charge	after	the	elephants	if	they	made	it	up	the	ramp	to	the	gate.	But	then	he	saw	some	pots	full	of	fire
being	 thrown	 from	 the	 walls	 of	 Chittorgarh	 towards	 the	 elephants.	 All	 of	 them	 fell	 short,	 bursting
harmlessly	on	the	surrounding	rocks.	Suddenly	orange-turbaned	Rajputs	began	to	emerge	through	a	door
set	 into	 the	 metal-studded	 main	 gate.	 The	 first	 man	 to	 appear	 put	 a	 taper	 to	 the	 large	 clay	 pot	 he	 was
carrying	and,	as	the	pitch	within	caught	fire,	began	to	whirl	the	pot	round	his	head	while	running	at	full
pelt	down	the	ramp	towards	the	advancing	elephants.	He	was	followed	by	his	companions,	all	similarly
equipped	with	flaming	pitch	pots.
Although	the	noise	of	battle	was	too	great	for	Akbar	to	hear	the	crackle	of	musketry,	his	musketeers	and
archers	 in	 the	 howdahs	 had	 clearly	 begun	 to	 fire.	 Several	 Rajputs	 fell	 on	 the	 ramp,	 dropping	 their	 fire
pots,	 but	 the	 rest	 ran	 on,	 including	 one	 man	 whose	 clothes	 had	 been	 set	 afire	 by	 burning	 pitch	 after	 a
musket	ball	had	shattered	its	clay	container.	Eventually	this	human	torch	collapsed	into	a	flaming	heap	but
not	before	he	had	waved	a	blazing	arm	to	encourage	his	fellows	on.	Other	Rajput	attackers	–	hit	by	musket
balls	 or	 arrows	 –	 plunged	 over	 the	 low	 wall	 that	 formed	 the	 side	 of	 the	 ramp,	 crashing	 to	 the	 ground
below.	 Yet	 still	 the	 rest	 ran	 on,	 oblivious	 of	 their	 comrades’	 deaths	 and	 the	 musket	 balls	 and	 arrows
cracking	and	hissing	around	them.
A	minute	or	two	after	they	emerged,	the	leading	Rajput	threw	his	flaming	pitch	pot	towards	the	first	of
Akbar’s	elephants,	which	had	just	put	its	front	feet	on	to	the	ramp.	Moments	later	the	Rajput,	hit	in	the
forehead	 by	 a	 musket	 ball,	 collapsed	 to	 the	 ground,	 but	 his	 pot	 of	 burning	 pitch	 burst	 squarely	 on	 its
target’s	 head	 and	 its	 flaming	 contents	 began	 to	 run	 down	 the	 elephant’s	 armour.	 Some	 of	 it	 must	 have
seeped	 between	 the	 steel	 plates	 or	 into	 the	 animal’s	 eyes	 because,	 maddened	 with	 pain	 and	 trumpeting
wildly,	it	turned	back	from	the	ramp,	striking	the	elephant	behind	it	and	setting	the	heavy	planking	of	its
howdah	afire.	Other	pitch	pots	thrown	from	the	walls	above,	as	well	as	by	the	survivors	of	those	who	had
run	down	the	ramp,	also	found	their	targets.
To	his	horror,	Akbar	saw	his	soldiers	begin	to	jump	from	the	howdahs	of	the	stricken	elephants	and	run
back	towards	their	own	lines.	Some	with	their	garments	alight	rolled	on	the	dry	ground	to	try	to	extinguish
them.	 Others	 just	 ran	 on	 screaming	 in	 agony,	 orange	 flames	 billowing	 behind	 them,	 until	 they	 too	 fell.
More	 elephants	 began	 to	 turn,	 streaked	 with	 flames.	 Akbar	 saw	 the	 mahout	 of	 one	 hammer	 into	 his
mount’s	 brain	 the	 large	 steel	 spike	 which	 mahouts	 carried	 to	 kill	 wounded	 elephants	 to	 prevent	 them
rampaging	 among	 their	 own	 men.	 The	 great	 beast	 collapsed	 almost	 immediately	 and	 was	 instantly	 still.
Another	 mahout	 was	 less	 brave	 and	 jumped	 from	 his	 animal’s	 neck,	 leaving	 it	 to	 turn	 frenzied	 and
riderless	and	run	back	trumpeting	towards	Akbar’s	barricades	with	its	howdah	on	fire.	It	crashed	into	one
barricade	and	stumbled	over.	As	it	fell,	it	exposed	its	unprotected	belly	to	some	of	Akbar’s	musketeers,
who	 despatched	 it	 with	 several	 shots.	 In	 its	 death	 throes,	 it	 rolled	 on	 its	 burning	 howdah,	 mercifully
crushing	the	life	from	the	soldiers	trapped	within.	The	pungent	stench	of	singed	and	burning	flesh,	human
and	animal,	now	blowing	across	the	battlefield	and	mingling	with	the	acrid	gunpowder	smoke	began	to
fill	Akbar’s	nostrils,	and	he	knew	this	attack	–	like	so	many	others	previously	–	had	no	chance	of	success.
To	save	further	futile	casualties,	with	a	wave	of	his	hand	he	ordered	his	forces	to	fall	back	and	turned	his
own	horse.	How	was	he	going	to	break	the	deadlock?

That	evening,	with	the	rays	of	the	setting	sun	reflecting	from	the	shoulder	pieces	of	the	gilded	breastplate
he	 now	 habitually	 wore	 when	 on	 campaign,	 Akbar	 was	 in	 sombre	 mood	 as	 he	 entered	 his	 scarlet
command	tent	where	his	war	council	was	assembling.	His	mind	was	still	void	of	viable	new	stratagems
as	he	took	his	place	on	a	small	throne	placed	at	the	centre	of	the	semicircle	in	which	Ahmed	Khan	and	his
other	generals	sat	cross-legged.	He	had	never	needed	their	help	and	advice	as	much	as	he	did	now	but	he
couldn’t	help	thinking	they	were	an	ill-assorted	bunch.	Some,	like	Muhammad	Beg	over	there	in	his	green
and	red	striped	robes,	had	served	even	longer	than	Ahmed	Khan	and	had	fought	at	Panipat	with	Babur	in
their	youth	and	experienced	all	the	trials	of	Humayun’s	life	and	had	the	scars	to	show	for	it.	Others,	like
the	 square-shouldered,	 extravagantly	 moustached	 Tajik	 Ali	 Gul,	 were	 younger	 and	 had	 only	 known
Humayun’s	last	few	battles.	Yet	others	were	even	newer	adherents.	Some,	such	as	the	large,	stout,	redturbaned	figure	of	Raja	Ravi	Singh,	noisily	crunching	almonds	from	the	engraved	copper	dish	in	front	of
him,	were	the	rulers	of	smaller	states,	even	–	like	Ravi	Singh	himself	–	of	Rajput	ones,	who	had	already
submitted	 to	 Akbar’s	 suzerainty	 after	 his	 defeat	 of	 Hemu.	 Whatever	 their	 age	 or	 background,	 all	 his
commanders	had	chastened	expressions	on	their	faces.
‘What	were	our	casualties	from	today’s	attack?’	asked	Akbar.
Ahmed	Khan	replied.	‘We	lost	the	pick	of	our	war	elephants	as	well	as	over	three	hundred	men.	Many
others	are	so	badly	burned	they	may	not	survive.’
‘Despite	the	losses	it	was	worth	trying,’	said	Akbar.	‘We	must	look	to	the	use	of	more	innovations	such
as	the	strengthened	howdahs	if	we	do	not	want	to	allow	Rana	Udai	time	to	raise	a	great	relieving	army,	or
perhaps	even	to	form	an	alliance	with	other	Rajput	rulers,	before	we	can	take	Chittorgarh.’
‘He	is	unlikely	to	find	allies,’	put	in	Ravi	Singh	quietly.	‘The	ranas	of	Mewar	have	long	alienated	their
fellow	rulers	with	their	pretensions	to	the	leadership	of	all	Rajasthan,	and	with	the	pompous	and	superior
airs	with	which	they	treat	their	fellows.’
‘That’s	good	to	hear,	at	least.	Has	Chittorgarh	been	conquered	before,	other	than	by	treachery?’
‘Yes,’	answered	Muhammad	Beg,	scratching	the	uneven	bridge	of	his	broken	nose.	‘Over	two	hundred
years	ago	by	a	man	called	Alauaddin	Khilji	and	more	recently	by	the	Gujaratis.’
‘Can	we	learn	anything	from	their	methods?’
‘I	know	nothing	of	how	Alauaddin	Khilji	succeeded:	it	is	too	long	lost	in	history.	However,	when	I	was
in	Gujarat	after	your	father’s	siege	of	Champnir,	I	spoke	to	an	old	Gujarati	who	told	me	that	in	their	attack
they	 tried,	 as	 we	 have,	 to	 push	 strong	 barricades	 forward	 to	 allow	 attackers	 to	 approach	 nearer.	 They
even	 constructed	 a	 kind	 of	 covered	 corridor	 made	 of	 thick	 hide	 –	 a	 sabat	 the	 man	 called	 it	 –	 which
allowed	them	to	get	quite	a	distance	up	the	ramp.	But	from	what	I	gathered,	their	final	victory	was	caused
as	much	by	deprivation	and	disease	among	the	defenders	as	by	anything	else.	I	would	have	mentioned	the
covered	corridors	before	if	I	hadn’t	thought	that,	while	they	were	successful	in	offering	protection	against
arrows,	they	would	be	easily	vulnerable	to	musket	balls	as	well	as	to	cannon	fire.’
‘But	couldn’t	we	strengthen	them	by	using	stones	and	mud	for	the	sides	and	heavy	wooden	planking	for
the	roof?’	asked	Ahmed	Khan.
‘It	would	take	a	long	time	and	cost	many	lives,	Majesty,’	put	in	Ali	Gul.
‘But	so	have	all	our	other	fruitless	attacks,’	Akbar	pointed	out.	‘My	grandfather	Babur	once	said	that	an
emperor	must	recognise	that	to	win	and	expand	an	empire	he	has	to	be	prepared	to	sacrifice	lives	–	even
potentially	his	own	and	those	of	his	closest	adherents	and	family.	Only	when	victory	is	complete	may	he
show	compassion	and	compensate	as	best	he	can	the	families	of	the	fallen.	The	idea	of	sabats	 is	 worth
pursuing.	 Have	 plans	 drawn	 up.	 Send	 parties	 in	 search	 of	 more	 stones	 and	 supplies	 of	 timber.	 To	 give
those	working	on	the	construction	some	protection,	throw	up	thick	hide	screens	as	the	Gujaratis	did.	They

will	stop	arrows,	and	the	Rajputs	won’t	want	to	expend	too	much	of	their	powder	in	firing	cannons	and
muskets	randomly	on	unseen	targets,	for	fear	of	exhausting	their	supplies.’
Akbar	was	feeling	optimistic	as	he	sat	on	his	horse	at	the	entrance	of	one	of	his	two	great	sabats.	 They
were	proving	quicker	to	construct	than	he	had	anticipated.	A	forest	only	a	few	miles	away	had	provided
good	 quantities	 of	 thick	 tree	 trunks	 for	 timbers.	 Prisoners	 had	 been	 put	 to	 the	 backbreaking	 work	 of
quarrying	stone.	Chittorgarh’s	defenders	had	proved,	as	Akbar	had	predicted,	reluctant	to	waste	powder
on	musket	and	cannon	fire	and	the	hide	screens	had	indeed	provided	a	degree	of	protection	from	arrows.
Nevertheless	up	to	a	hundred	men	a	day	–	mostly	poor	barefoot	labourers	lured	by	the	silver	coin	offered
by	Akbar	–	had	been	killed	as	they	worked.
As	 he	 had	 promised	 he	 would,	 Akbar	 had	 had	 his	 clerks	 carefully	 record	 the	 names	 of	 the	 dead	 and
wounded	in	leather-bound	ledgers	so	that	they	or	their	families	could	receive	compensation	once	victory
was	secured.	The	sabat	Akbar	was	entering	had	been	constructed	on	a	huge	scale.	It	was	–	as	Muhammad
Beg,	whom	he	had	put	in	charge	of	the	works,	proudly	assured	him	–	wide	enough	to	accommodate	ten
horsemen	riding	abreast	or	a	team	of	oxen	pulling	a	small	cannon,	and	high	enough	to	allow	even	a	large
war	 elephant	 to	 get	 through.	 Akbar	 knew	 from	 the	 reports	 reaching	 him	 that,	 while	 the	 sabats	 were
advancing	 sinuously	 and	 inexorably	 up	 and	 round	 the	 slopes	 leading	 to	 the	 ramp,	 like	 the	 tentacles	 of
some	predatory	creature,	they	had	not	yet	reached	their	target,	but	it	could	not	be	long	.	.	.
‘How	far	does	this	sabat	extend	at	the	moment,	Muhammad	Beg?’	he	asked.
‘To	about	a	hundred	yards	from	the	foot	of	the	ramp.	We	had	a	setback	three	days	ago	when	a	Rajput
sortie	managed	to	set	fire	to	some	of	the	roof	timbers.	Only	a	display	of	great	bravery	by	our	labourers,
who	formed	a	bucket	chain	all	the	way	from	our	wells	to	put	the	fire	out,	prevented	the	destruction	of	the
forward	quarter	of	the	sabat.’
‘Let	me	know	the	names	of	any	who	merit	special	reward.’
‘Majesty.’
‘Now	 let	 me	 see	 for	 myself	 the	 inside	 of	 one	 of	 these	 sabats.’	 Akbar	 kicked	 his	 black	 horse	 gently
forward	 into	 the	 darkness	 of	 the	 entrance.	 The	 thick	 wooden	 roof	 made	 it	 cooler	 inside.	 As	 he	 went
further	 along,	 a	 sour	 aroma	 –	 a	 combination	 of	 damp	 earth,	 smoke,	 and	 sweat,	 urine	 and	 faeces	 both
animal	and	human	–	began	to	build	up	in	his	nostrils.	Occasional	torches	of	cloth	dipped	in	pitch	placed
in	holders	in	the	walls	provided	the	only	light.	By	each	stood	a	labourer	with	leather	buckets	of	sand	as
well	as	water	beside	him,	ready	to	douse	any	flame	that	looked	like	getting	out	of	hand	and	setting	alight
the	resinous	wood	of	the	roof.	As	Akbar	passed	these	labourers,	most	of	whom	were	dressed	in	little	but
a	loincloth	and	a	ragged	shirt,	they	prostrated	themselves	before	him.	Sometimes	he	dismounted	to	speak
briefly	 to	 them	 –	 a	 question	 about	 where	 they	 came	 from	 or	 the	 extent	 of	 their	 family,	 a	 word	 of
encouragement	and	a	gift	of	a	small	coin	–	before	moving	forward	again.
As	 he	 was	 listening	 to	 a	 wizened,	 white-haired	 torch-bearer	 explain	 that	 he	 was	 the	 head	 of	 a	 large
family	from	a	hamlet	called	Gurgaon	near	Delhi,	a	dull	thud	shook	the	wall	of	the	sabat,	dislodging	many
small	stones	and	one	or	two	larger	ones.	The	labourer	flung	himself	to	the	ground	but	soon	scrambled	to
his	 feet	 upon	 seeing	 Akbar	 still	 standing,	 holding	 on	 to	 his	 rearing	 horse.	 Shamefacedly	 he	 said,	 ‘I
apologise.	I	am	not	as	brave	when	these	cannon	balls	strike	as	you,	Majesty.’
‘You	are	sufficiently	brave	to	stay	at	your	post,’	said	Akbar.	‘And	remember	something	my	father	told
me	about	battle.	If	you	hear	the	sound	of	an	impact	or	an	explosion,	you	have	survived	it.’
The	labourer	smiled	briefly.	‘I	will	remember,	Majesty.’	Akbar	slipped	him	some	small	coins,	and	the
man	raised	both	his	hands	above	his	head	and	pressed	them	together	in	the	Hindu	form	of	salutation.	Then

Akbar	rode	on	through	the	sabat.	Before	long,	despite	its	tortuous	bends,	he	could	see	some	light	dimly
reflected	from	the	mouth.	Occasionally	he	heard	a	musket	shot,	either	from	his	own	men	trying	to	protect
the	workers	as	they	laboured	in	the	open	air	or	from	the	defenders	on	the	battlements	above	who	were
trying	to	pick	them	off.	Once	he	heard	a	strangled	cry	which	transformed	into	an	animal-like	shriek	before
dying	away.	By	now,	Akbar	knew	enough	of	the	sounds	of	battle	to	realise	that	another	of	his	labourers
had	died	in	his	cause.
Soon	he	was	at	the	end	of	the	sabat	where	boulders	were	piled	ready	to	extend	the	walls	near	stacks	of
roughly	 sawn	 tree	 trunks	 for	 the	 roof.	 Just	 within	 the	 tunnel’s	 mouth	 sweating	 labourers	 were	 mixing
buckets	of	water	with	dry	earth	to	make	mud	to	serve	as	a	kind	of	cement	to	hold	the	walls	together.	Akbar
and	Muhammad	Beg	dismounted.	Both	men	put	on	their	helmets	and	with	bodyguards	holding	large	metal
shields	in	front	of	them	made	their	way	across	a	patch	of	open	ground	towards	one	of	the	rock	piles	which
would	provide	them	with	some	protection.
‘Majesty,	if	you	come	here	you	will	have	a	good	view	of	Chittorgarh’s	battlements,’	called	an	officer
from	a	little	further	along	the	mound.	His	clothes	and	once	white	turban	were	streaked	with	dust	and	mud.
‘Be	careful,	Majesty,’	said	Muhammad	Beg.	‘If	you	can	see	the	battlements,	those	upon	them	can	see
you	and	they	may	recognise	you	from	your	gilded	breastplate.’
‘My	 men	 daily	 expose	 themselves	 to	 such	 risks.	 I	 shouldn’t	 scruple	 to	 do	 the	 same,’	 said	 Akbar.	 He
manoeuvred	along	to	where	the	officer	was	standing	pointing	upwards.	The	top	of	the	walls	was	clearly
visible	 and	 there	 seemed	 to	 be	 some	 kind	 of	 lookout	 platform	 on	 them.	 After	 Akbar	 had	 watched	 for	 a
minute	 or	 two,	 he	 saw	 two	 figures	 emerge	 on	 to	 the	 lookout	 and	 begin	 scanning	 the	 Moghuls’	 position
keenly.	One	–	a	tall,	black-bearded	man	–	pointed	something	out	to	the	other.	From	the	sparkling	flashes
as	 the	 sun	 caught	 the	 rings	 on	 his	 fingers	 and	 from	 his	 general	 demeanour	 he	 was	 clearly	 an	 important
commander.	 Akbar	 whispered	 to	 the	 white-turbaned	 officer,	 ‘Get	 me	 two	 loaded	 muskets	 and	 a	 firing
tripod.	I	want	to	bring	down	these	fine	fellows.’
Quickly	two	of	the	musketeers	posted	at	the	entrance	to	the	sabat	passed	their	weapons	and	a	tripod
forward	 to	 Akbar.	 The	 only	 way	 that	 Akbar	 could	 get	 sufficient	 elevation	 on	 the	 six-foot-long	 musket
while	keeping	it	steady	on	its	tripod	was	by	lowering	himself	on	to	the	dusty	ground	and	half-lying,	halfcrouching	behind	the	musket.	As	quietly	and	as	quickly	as	he	could,	he	aligned	the	barrel	on	the	jewelled
man,	just	as	if	his	target	were	a	tiger	in	a	jungle	clearing.	Holding	his	breath	to	keep	himself	as	still	as	he
was	able,	he	fired.	Coughing	from	the	acrid	smoke	of	the	discharge,	he	saw	the	man	pitch	forward	and
plunge	from	the	lookout	platform	to	smash	with	a	dull	thud	into	the	ground	only	a	few	yards	away.	His
companion	disappeared	before	Akbar	could	ready	the	second	musket.
‘Bring	the	body	in,’	he	ordered.	‘Let’s	see	who	we	have.’
When	two	soldiers	had	dragged	the	broken	figure	over,	Akbar	saw	that	his	musket	ball	seemed	to	have
caught	the	man	above	the	right	ear,	although	he	could	not	be	entirely	sure	since	much	of	the	rest	of	the	back
of	the	man’s	head	was	a	bloody	misshapen	mess	from	the	impact	of	the	fall.
‘He	is	clearly	a	high-ranking	officer,’	said	Muhammad	Beg,	‘but	I	don’t	recognise	him.’
‘Neither	do	I,’	said	Akbar,	‘but	Raja	Ravi	may	well	do	so,	despite	the	wounds,	if	we	show	the	body	to
him.	 He	 met	 many	 of	 the	 leaders	 of	 Mewar	 in	 past	 years	 when	 there	 was	 less	 hostility	 between	 their
states.’
Akbar	was	standing	with	Raja	Ravi	Singh	on	top	of	one	of	the	artificial	mounds	of	stone	and	mud	he	had
had	constructed	some	months	previously	to	give	a	slightly	improved	view	of	the	city	of	Chittorgarh.	The
raja	spoke.	‘Majesty,	since	you	killed	Jai	Mal	with	your	fine	shot	the	other	day	there	has	been	much	more

activity	 within	 the	 fort.	 Despite	 their	 rejection	 of	 your	 offer	 of	 surrender	 terms	 when	 you	 returned	 the
body,	the	defenders	have	clearly	become	unsettled	by	his	death	and	the	progress	of	the	sabats.	 They’ve
increased	 the	 number	 of	 their	 sorties	 attempting	 to	 destroy	 the	 sabats	 and	 the	 cannon	 we	 have	 dragged
through	them,	but	we’ve	held	them	off	without	much	difficulty.	Their	food	must	be	running	out	too,	given
the	number	of	foraging	parties	we’ve	foiled	recently.’
‘What	do	you	think	they’ll	try	next?’
‘I	don’t	know,	Majesty.’
The	two	men	stood	in	silence	for	a	while	until	Akbar	suddenly	noticed	spurts	of	orange	flame	and	dark
smoke	beginning	to	spiral	into	the	sky	from	several	places	at	once	within	the	fort.	He	had	seen	such	fires
previously	but	only	coming	from	single	points.	Raja	Ravi	had	told	him	that	these	were	funeral	pyres	for
important	 leaders	 killed	 in	 battle.	 The	 one	 that	 had	 followed	 the	 return	 of	 Jai	 Mal’s	 body	 had	 been
particularly	fierce.	However,	these	new	fires	springing	up	would	clearly	dwarf	even	that.
‘What	is	it,	Ravi?’
‘The	 defenders	 must	 have	 recognised	 that	 there	 is	 no	 prospect	 of	 a	 relieving	 force	 and	 that	 defeat	 is
inevitable.	They	want	to	choose	their	own	moment	to	die.	They	are	making	jauhar.	Those	fires	you	see
are	 funeral	 pyres.	 The	 Rajput	 women	 and	 girls	 are	 throwing	 themselves	 into	 them	 from	 specially
constructed	 platforms	 to	 burn	 alive.	 Mothers	 will	 be	 clamping	 their	 babies	 to	 them	 as	 they	 jump.	 The
sudden	 spurts	 of	 orange	 and	 yellow	 flame	 you	 see	 are	 when	 the	 men	 throw	 buckets	 of	 oil	 and	 ghee	 –
clarified	butter	–	on	to	the	pyres	to	increase	the	intensity	of	the	heat	and	end	their	families’	suffering	more
quickly.	Given	courage	by	the	knowledge	that	their	wives	and	children	are	dead	and	can	suffer	no	further
pain	or	indignity	at	the	hands	of	their	enemies,	in	the	morning	the	men	and	boys	will	dress	themselves	in
their	 saffron	 battle	 robes.	 They	 will	 drink	 opium	 water	 from	 each	 other’s	 palms	 to	 celebrate	 their
brotherhood	and	to	deaden	the	pain	of	wounds,	and	then	they	will	sally	forth	in	one	last	heroic	charge	to
kill	as	many	of	us,	their	enemies,	as	they	can	before	meeting	their	own	deaths.’
Raja	Ravi’s	voice	was	hushed	and	his	tone	admiring.	After	all,	Ravi	was	a	Rajput,	thought	Akbar.	Even
though	such	sacrifices	were	entirely	alien	and	essentially	abhorrent	to	him,	Akbar	too	could	not	help	but
feel	a	degree	of	admiration	for	the	heroism	these	women	were	displaying,	dying	inside	the	fortress	as	he
watched.	‘Let	the	fires	glow	white	to	lessen	their	pain,’	he	prayed.	Then,	once	more	the	commander,	he
said	to	Ravi,	‘If	you	are	right,	we	must	prepare	for	their	death	charge.	Give	orders	for	more	cannon	to	be
hauled	through	the	sabats	tonight	and	positioned	behind	what	shelter	we	can	throw	up	where	they	have	a
clear	 field	 of	 fire	 along	 the	 ramp.	 Have	 musketeers	 and	 archers	 deploy	 from	 the	 exit	 of	 the	 tunnels	 at
dawn.	Have	squadrons	of	horsemen	and	war	elephants	standing	ready	to	enter	them	as	soon	as	we	detect
movement	behind	the	fortress’s	gate.	Horses	and	elephants	will	not	wait	in	the	dark	of	the	sabats	without
becoming	restive.	It	is	better	that	they	only	go	into	them	when	action	is	close	at	hand.’
Early	the	next	morning	Akbar	stood	just	outside	the	exit	from	the	sabat	which	reached	the	nearest	to	the
winding	ramp	leading	to	Chittorgarh’s	main	gate.	His	commanders	were	around	him	and	he	was	wearing
full	battle	garb,	his	gilded	breastplate	strapped	tightly	around	him,	his	helmet	squarely	on	his	head	and	his
grandfather’s	sword	Alamgir	–	newly	sharpened	and	honed	–	at	his	side.	During	the	night	the	defenders	of
Chittorgarh	had	fired	sporadically	on	Akbar’s	men	as	they	feverishly	constructed	extra	barricades	around
and	about	the	sabat	exits	and	as	near	to	the	ramp	as	they	dared	go.	The	Rajputs	had	however	succeeded	in
killing	three	of	a	team	of	a	dozen	oxen	dragging	a	small	bronze	cannon	into	position	and	the	others	had
stampeded	in	panic,	overturning	the	cannon	and	injuring	some	archers	standing	nearby	in	their	rush.
But	the	defenders	had	been	content	to	watch	the	cannon	righted,	seemingly	reserving	their	strength	and
powder	 for	 their	 last	 attack	 the	 next	 day.	 Long	 before	 dawn,	 drums	 had	 begun	 to	 sound	 out	 from
Chittorgarh’s	 crenellated	 watchtowers	 more	 loudly	 than	 Akbar	 had	 ever	 heard.	 Several	 hours	 had	 now

passed,	but	their	rhythm	remained	hypnotic,	the	beat	incessant	and	accompanied	by	the	blare	and	screech
of	long	trumpets.	Occasionally	a	great	roar	of	voices	could	be	heard,	overtopping	all	other	sounds,	which
Ravi	explained	was	the	defenders’	prayers	to	their	Hindu	gods	in	the	fortress-city’s	temples.
‘When	will	they	attack,	Ravi?’
‘It	cannot	be	long	now.	They	will	have	worked	themselves	into	such	a	pitch	of	frenzied	ecstasy	that	they
will	not	be	able	to	hold	themselves	back.’
A	quarter	of	an	hour	later,	the	metal	grille	in	front	of	the	great	iron-studded	gates	of	Chittorgarh	began
slowly	to	wind	up	and	behind	it	the	wooden	gates	themselves	started	to	open.	As	soon	as	there	was	space,
a	warrior	on	a	white	horse	squeezed	through	and	then,	waving	a	curved	sword	above	his	head	and	with
his	 saffron	 robes	 streaming	 behind	 him,	 charged	 down	 the	 long	 winding	 ramp.	 He	 was	 immediately
followed	by	others	and	then	by	more	and	more	riders.	Soon,	mixed	in	with	them,	came	men	and	youths	on
foot.	 All	 were	 in	 saffron.	 All	 had	 weapons	 in	 their	 hands.	 All	 were	 screaming	 a	 war	 cry	 which	 was
incomprehensible	to	Akbar	but	which	Ravi	hastily	translated	as,	‘Life	is	cheap,	honour	is	not.’
‘Fire	when	you	will.’	Akbar	gave	the	order	to	his	gunners,	archers	and	musketmen.	Almost	immediately
the	first	cannon	ball	brought	down	a	rider	on	a	black	horse.	As	he	fell,	another	horse	stumbled	over	him
and	plunged	with	its	rider	over	the	low	wall	of	the	ramp,	falling	a	hundred	feet	on	to	the	stony	ground.
Others	 too	 were	 hit	 by	 arrows	 and	 musket	 balls	 but	 the	 rest	 came	 on	 relentlessly,	 pushing	 aside	 the
wounded,	uncaring	whether	they	tumbled	from	the	ramp	or	were	simply	trampled	by	the	oncoming	saffron
tide.	The	leading	warrior	on	his	white	horse	reached	the	first	of	Akbar’s	cannon	just	as	the	gunners	were
about	 to	 set	 the	 taper	 to	 the	 firing	 hole.	 Before	 they	 could	 do	 so,	 he	 cut	 down	 two	 of	 the	 gunners	 with
sword	slashes.	Then	he	charged	a	second	cannon	head	on.	This	time	Akbar’s	artillerymen	were	quicker,
discharging	the	cannon	moments	before	he	reached	it.	The	ball	hit	the	rider	in	his	abdomen	with	its	full
initial	 force	 so	 that	 his	 upper	 torso	 was	 severed	 from	 his	 lower.	 Miraculously	 uninjured,	 the	 horse
galloped	on	through	Akbar’s	lines,	its	white	coat	now	drenched	in	scarlet	blood	and	its	rider’s	feet	still	in
the	stirrups.
Other	 Rajputs	 had	 now	 reached	 the	 bottom	 of	 the	 ramp	 and	 were	 spreading	 out	 to	 attack	 the	 Moghul
troops.	So	strong	was	their	urge	to	fight	and	die	that	they	kept	no	formation	but	ran	at	any	positions	that
caught	 their	 eye.	 It	 took	 several	 arrows	 or	 musket	 balls	 to	 stop	 a	 man	 in	 his	 tracks.	 However	 badly
wounded	they	were,	if	they	reached	Akbar’s	lines	they	would	instantly	fling	themselves	on	to	his	soldiers,
wrestling	them	to	the	ground	and	slashing	at	them	with	their	heavy	double-edged	swords	and	the	serratedbladed	 daggers	 that	 nearly	 all	 of	 them	 grasped	 in	 their	 hands.	 Seeing	 that	 a	 company	 of	 his	 musketeers
were	 close	 to	 being	 overwhelmed,	 Akbar	 ordered	 them	 to	 fall	 back	 to	 the	 protection	 of	 some	 archers
while	they	reloaded.	The	ramp	down	from	the	gate	was	now	bloodstained	and	clogged	with	the	dead	and
dying.
Despite	the	many	casualties	they	were	suffering,	Akbar	saw	to	his	relief	and	delight	that	his	men	were
slowly	gaining	the	advantage	in	the	hand-to-hand	fighting	and	were	surrounding	small	groups	of	Rajputs.
Very	 few	 were	 still	 emerging	 from	 Chittorgarh’s	 gateway.	 Nearly	 all	 who	 did	 so	 were	 shot	 down	 long
before	they	reached	the	foot	of	the	ramp	as	they	clambered	over	the	bodies	of	their	fallen	comrades.	Any
who	succeeded	in	reaching	the	bottom	met	almost	immediate	death	by	the	swords	of	Akbar’s	horsemen
who,	having	come	through	the	sabats,	were	now	riding	down	all	Rajput	stragglers.	Akbar	watched	as	his
men	systematically	eliminated	each	of	the	small	pockets	of	resistance.	He	now	knew	beyond	all	doubt	that
the	longed-for	victory,	his	first	without	the	guiding	hand	of	Bairam	Khan,	was	his.	It	would	be	the	first	of
many.	 Yet	 elated	 as	 he	 was,	 he	 could	 not	 but	 be	 impressed	 by	 the	 Rajputs’	 raw	 courage,	 and	 was
particularly	touched	by	the	conduct	of	three	youths,	the	eldest	of	whom	looked	no	more	than	fourteen,	who
embraced	before	rushing,	swords	raised	above	their	heads,	towards	a	group	of	Moghul	archers,	only	to	be

shot	 down	 by	 a	 shower	 of	 hissing	 arrows	 long	 before	 they	 reached	 them.	 Such	 warriors	 would	 make
better	allies	than	foes.
Soon	the	battlefield	was	still.	Akbar	called	Ravi	Singh	to	him.	‘Have	these	brave	warriors	cremated
according	to	their	religion.	Since	the	senior	officers	refused	my	offer	of	surrender	after	Jai	Mal’s	death,
have	 any	 who	 survived	 executed.	 Death	 should	 be	 no	 hardship	 to	 them	 since	 by	 remaining	 alive	 they
violate	their	own	warrior	code.	Then	raze	the	fortress,	both	to	stop	it	being	used	against	us	again	and	as	a
warning	to	any	other	Rajput	ruler	who	resists	rather	than	accepts	the	offers	of	alliance	I	intend	to	make
them.’

Chapter	8

Hirabai

ajesty,	Rai	Surjan	wishes	to	surrender.	He	offers	to	become	your	vassal	and	in	return	asks	nothing
but	 the	 lives	 of	 those	 within	 the	 walls	 of	 Ranthambhor.’	 The	 elderly	 Rajput’s	 eyes	 were	 on	 the
ground	 but	 the	 carriage	 of	 his	 tall,	 wiry	 body	 was	 proud.	 The	 words	 he	 had	 just	 spoken	 had	 not
come	easily	to	him.
Akbar	 suppressed	 a	 smile	 of	 triumph.	 Sometimes	 he	 thought	 of	 the	 officers	 executed	 after	 the	 fall	 of
Chittorgarh	but	he	had	no	regrets.	Neither	did	he	regret	ordering	the	destruction	of	Chittorgarh	itself	–	the
orange	and	red	flames	and	then	the	curling	grey	smoke	had	been	visible	across	the	Rajasthani	deserts	for
days.	 His	 display	 of	 ruthlessness	 had	 had	 the	 intended	 effect.	 His	 siege	 of	 Ranthambhor	 –	 a	 fortified
Rajput	town	known	throughout	Hindustan	for	the	strength	of	its	solid	brick	walls	and	high	towers	–	had
lasted	 less	 than	 a	 week.	 If	 Rai	 Surjan	 was	 ready	 to	 submit	 to	 him	 it	 meant	 that	 all	 the	 leading	 Rajput
princes	had	now	accepted	his	authority.	Except,	of	course,	Rana	Udai	Singh	of	Mewar,	still	skulking	but
defiant	in	the	Aravalli	hills	after	the	loss	of	Chittorgarh	and	the	territory	around	it.	And	it	was	still	less
than	a	year	since	the	fall	of	Chittorgarh.	With	the	Rajasthani	princes	–	the	most	powerful	rulers	of	northern
India	–	and	their	saffron-robed	warriors	by	his	side,	what	couldn’t	he	achieve?
‘Tell	your	master	I	accept	his	offer	and	will	spare	the	lives	of	all	within	Ranthambhor.	Tonight	he	may
remain	with	honour	within	its	walls	and	tomorrow,	when	the	sun	is	a	spear’s	height	above	the	horizon,	I
will	receive	him	and	his	senior	commanders	here	in	my	camp	and	we	will	celebrate	our	new	alliance.’
That	 night	 Akbar	 summoned	 a	 scribe	 to	 his	 tent.	 Sometimes	 such	 momentous	 images,	 such	 potent
emotions	filled	his	mind	that	he	truly	regretted	he	still	could	not	write	himself.	When	he	returned	to	Agra
he	would	appoint	a	court	chronicler	–	perhaps	several	–	to	record	the	achievements	of	his	reign	and	those
of	 his	 father	 and	 grandfather,	 but	 for	 the	 moment	 the	 scribe	 would	 do.	 He	 waited	 while	 the	 young	 man
unstoppered	the	green	jade	ink	bottle	dangling	from	a	chain	round	his	neck	and	sharpened	his	quill,	and
then	began	to	dictate.
‘In	this	year	of	my	reign,	the	flames	of	battle	rose	high	in	Rajasthan	but	seeing	the	might	and	resolution
of	my	armies	the	courage	of	the	enemy	became	like	water	and	trickled	away	as	raindrops	into	the	sand.
My	victory	here	is	complete	and	a	fitting	foundation	for	future	glories	.	.	.’
Long	after	the	scribe	had	left	and	the	camp	had	fallen	silent	around	him,	Akbar	found	it	hard	to	sleep.
His	 euphoric	 words	 had	 come	 from	 the	 heart.	 He	 had	 a	 glorious	 destiny	 –	 he	 was	 sure	 of	 it	 –	 and	 he
wanted	the	world	to	know	of	his	exploits	through	the	court	chronicles	he	would	have	compiled.	But	no
man	could	live	for	ever.	A	single	arrow	or	musket	ball	in	battle,	or	an	assassin’s	blade	between	his	ribs,
might	suddenly	cut	off	his	life,	and	then	what	would	happen	to	the	Moghul	dynasty?	With	no	obvious	heir
the	 empire	 could	 soon	 fall	 apart	 as	 the	 Moghuls	 disintegrated	 again	 into	 a	 collection	 of	 petty	 warlords
more	 concerned	 with	 feuding	 with	 one	 another	 than	 banding	 together	 to	 keep	 what	 they	 had	 won	 in
Hindustan.	 If	 so,	 he	 would	 have	 failed	 just	 as	 surely	 as	 if,	 through	 carelessness	 and	 complacency,	 he
allowed	his	armies	to	be	defeated.
That	mustn’t	happen.	He	was	in	his	twenties	now	and	it	was	his	duty	to	secure	the	future	of	the	empire

‘M

and	the	dynasty,	and	to	do	that	he	should	marry	and	produce	sons.	It	would	certainly	please	his	mother	and
his	 aunt.	 They	 had	 been	 hinting	 about	 it	 for	 a	 while,	 even	 suggesting	 possible	 brides.	 But	 preoccupied
with	 planning	 the	 conquest	 of	 Rajasthan	 Akbar	 hadn’t	 paid	 much	 attention	 and,	 in	 truth,	 he	 still	 felt	 no
great	desire	to	marry.	He	enjoyed	sex	but	his	haram	provided	him	with	infinite	pleasures	and	possibilities
for	that.	He	felt	no	immediate	craving	for	the	kind	of	close	and	intimate	relationship	Hamida	had	shared
with	Humayun.	He	had	not	fully	recovered	his	ability	to	trust	himself	mentally	to	others	since	his	betrayal
by	 Adham	 Khan	 and	 Maham	 Anga.	 But	 sitting	 here	 restless	 and	 alone	 with	 his	 thoughts	 in	 the	 semidarkness,	he	had	to	accept	that	the	time	for	marriage	had	come	–	if	not	for	himself,	then	for	his	empire	and
above	all	for	the	future	of	the	dynasty.	What	mattered	most,	of	course,	was	having	strong,	healthy	sons,	but
marriage	 could	 also	 help	 him	 build	 alliances.	 He	 remembered	 some	 words	 from	 Babur’s	 diary	 that	 his
qorchi	had	read	to	him:	‘I	chose	my	wives	to	bind	my	chiefs	to	me.’
Outside,	a	sudden	high-pitched	squeaking	announced	that	some	small	creature	had	been	carried	off	by
an	owl	or	another	predator.	Pleased	to	have	come	to	a	decision,	Akbar	stood	up	and	stretched.	He	would
think	as	carefully	about	the	choice	of	his	first	bride	as	about	any	military	campaign.	The	women	Hamida
and	Gulbadan	had	suggested	to	him	belonged	to	the	old	Moghul	aristocracy	–	one	was	a	distant	cousin	of
his	and	another	was	the	daughter	of	the	governor	of	Kabul	–	but	were	such	women	really	the	best	choice
for	the	ruler	of	Hindustan?	Were	their	relations	the	chiefs	he	most	wanted	to	bind	to	him?
As	Akbar	dug	his	left	heel	hard	into	its	coarse-haired	flank,	the	camel	shot	forward,	grunting	even	more
querulously	than	while	it	had	been	waiting	in	the	hot	sun	for	the	race	down	the	wide	mud	bank	along	the
Jumna	 to	 begin.	 The	 crowds	 held	 back	 by	 the	 spear	 shafts	 of	 his	 soldiers	 roared	 encouragement,	 and
glancing	up	briefly	to	his	right	Akbar	caught	the	brightly	coloured	rows	of	his	royal	guests	–	the	red-	and
orange-turbaned	Rajput	kings	who	had	sworn	allegiance	to	him	–	assembled	in	the	place	of	honour	on	the
walls	of	the	Agra	fort.	But	this	was	no	time	to	think	of	anything	except	winning.	Right	leg	crooked	on	the
base	of	the	animal’s	bony	neck	and	braced	against	the	left,	and	with	the	rope	reins	looped	through	a	brass
ring	in	the	camel’s	nostrils	in	one	hand	and	a	length	of	bamboo	in	the	other,	Akbar	urged	his	mount	on.	The
rolling,	lopsided	gait,	so	different	from	the	smoother	rhythms	of	a	horse,	was	exhilarating.
He’d	chosen	his	camel	well	–	a	young	male	with	a	coat	the	colour	of	ripe	corn,	strong	thighs	and	flanks,
and	a	tendency	to	snap	and	spit	that	suggested	pent-up	energy.	Looking	quickly	round,	he	saw	he	was	at
least	half	a	length	in	front	of	the	nearest	of	his	five	rivals,	but	the	course	was	two	miles	long	and	much
could	still	happen.	The	ground	was	a	blur	beneath	him	but	suddenly	another	camel	came	bumping	against
his	and	he	felt	its	rider’s	thigh	strike	his	own.	It	was	Man	Singh,	the	fourteen-year-old	son	of	the	Raja	of
Amber,	 his	 dark	 hair	 streaming	 out	 behind	 him.	 The	 Rajputs	 were	 legendary	 riders	 but	 so	 were	 the
Moghuls	 .	 .	 .	 ‘Hai!	 Hai!’	 Akbar	 yelled,	 raising	 his	 stick.	 But	 he	 had	 no	 need	 to	 use	 it.	 His	 own	 camel
turned	its	head	and	as	its	long-lashed	eyes	saw	its	rival	it	surged	forward	with	a	bellow.
For	a	few	moments	the	two	animals	were	nearly	level	but	then	Akbar	was	ahead	again,	earth	flying	up
around	him	and	the	sour	smell	of	sweat	–	human	and	animal	–	in	his	nostrils.	‘Hai!	Hai!’	he	shouted	again,
as	 much	 to	 release	 his	 excitement	 as	 to	 urge	 his	 camel	 on.	 His	 throat	 was	 full	 of	 dust	 and	 sweat	 was
running	down	his	face,	but	all	he	cared	about	were	the	two	spears	marking	the	end	of	the	course	that	he
could	see	some	two	hundred	yards	in	front.	Twisting	round	he	saw	he	was	a	good	five	yards	clear	of	Man
Singh.	He	felt	he	was	flying,	charging	towards	certain	victory.
But	 suddenly	 his	 camel	 stumbled,	 front	 feet	 entangled	 in	 a	 straggle	 of	 dry	 brambles	 that	 Akbar,	 eyes
fixed	on	the	finish,	hadn’t	seen.	As	the	beast’s	front	legs	buckled,	Akbar	leaned	back	as	hard	as	he	could
against	the	hump,	trying	to	keep	his	balance	and	clamping	his	left	leg	tight	against	the	animal’s	ribs.	At	the

same	time,	though	his	every	instinct	screamed	at	him	to	pull	tightly	on	them,	he	slackened	the	reins	to	give
his	mount	the	freedom	it	needed	to	try	to	right	itself.	With	its	head	almost	touching	the	ground,	the	camel
seemed	about	to	come	crashing	down.	Dropping	the	reins	entirely,	Akbar	flung	himself	forward,	clinging
to	the	nape	of	the	beast’s	muscular	neck	and	trying	to	guess	on	which	side	it	would	fall,	knowing	he	must
roll	clear	or	be	crushed.
Then,	somehow,	the	camel	struggled	upright	again	and	kicking	clear	of	the	brambles	galloped	on.	Akbar
grabbed	the	reins	and	managed	to	haul	himself	up	and	regain	his	own	balance.	The	whole	incident	could
only	have	lasted	two	or	three	moments	but	it	had	been	enough	for	Man	Singh	nearly	to	catch	up	with	him.
They	were	almost	thigh	to	thigh	again.	‘Hai,’	Akbar	yelled,	‘hai!’	and	again	his	camel	responded,	neck
almost	horizontal,	snorting	gustily.	Five	strides	more	and	Akbar	shot	between	the	two	spears	just	a	foot
ahead	 of	 Man	 Singh.	 As	 he	 reined	 in,	 drummers	 were	 already	 beating	 the	 cylindrical	 drums	 suspended
from	hide	thongs	round	their	necks	to	acclaim	his	triumph.	Akbar	jumped	down	from	his	steaming	camel,
full	of	the	sheer	joy	of	being	alive	and	victorious.
Two	hours	later,	as	dusk	was	falling	and	the	dark	silhouettes	of	the	first	bats	dipped	and	swerved	through
the	 gathering	 shadows,	 Akbar	 stood	 on	 a	 balcony	 of	 the	 Agra	 fort,	 freshly	 bathed,	 dressed	 in	 a	 green
brocade	tunic	and	pantaloons	and	wearing	a	gold	chain	set	with	thirty	carved	emeralds	round	his	neck.
His	muscles	still	ached	from	the	camel	race	but	no	matter.	His	Rajput	guests,	assembled	around	him,	were
about	to	witness	the	next	stage	in	the	festivities	he	had	arranged	in	their	honour.	Mindful	of	their	pride,	he
had	determined	to	make	the	celebrations	so	spectacular	that	by	the	time	his	new	allies	returned	to	their
kingdoms	 reports	 would	 already	 have	 reached	 their	 subjects	 of	 the	 great	 esteem	 in	 which	 the	 Moghul
emperor	held	their	rulers.
At	 a	 signal	 from	 Akbar,	 golden	 and	 green	 stars	 exploded	 into	 the	 night	 sky,	 as	 noisy	 as	 musket	 fire.
Flashes	of	silver	and	red	followed,	then	bursts	of	saffron	yellow	accompanied	by	a	high	screeching	like
that	of	a	giant	eagle.	Next	a	fine	mist,	purple	and	pink,	stole	into	the	air.	From	all	around	him,	and	from	the
crowds	 gathered	 along	 the	 banks	 of	 the	 Jumna	 below,	 Akbar	 heard	 excited	 gasps.	 The	 magicians	 from
Kashgar	who	had	come	to	his	court	were	highly	skilled	at	such	things.	He	had	ordered	them	to	produce
their	 finest	 display	 and	 they	 had	 not	 disappointed	 him.	 But	 with	 the	 finale	 drawing	 close,	 Akbar	 was
curious	to	see	how	these	strange	men	in	their	long,	padded	coats	of	embroidered	silk	and	tasselled	hats
would	fulfil	the	special	command	he	had	given	them.	For	some	moments	all	was	quiet	and	dark	and	Akbar
could	sense	the	anticipation	as	the	crowds	waited	to	see	what	fresh	wonders	would	unfurl	above	them.
Suddenly	 came	 a	 hissing	 and	 a	 whooshing	 and	 the	 heavens	 filled	 with	 the	 striped	 face	 of	 a	 great	 tiger,
jaws	 yawning	 so	 wide	 it	 looked	 ready	 to	 swallow	 the	 universe.	 For	 a	 few	 moments	 it	 hung	 there,
ferocious	and	magnificent,	and	then	the	bands	of	black	and	orange	dissolved	into	tiny	shimmering	stars.
‘The	tiger	overshadows	us	all	now,’	said	Raja	Bhagwan	Das	of	Amber,	a	short,	wiry	man	in	his	thirties
with	 a	 fine-boned	 face	 and	 the	 same	 eagle	 nose	 and	 sharp	 black	 eyes	 as	 his	 son,	 Man	 Singh.	 The
vermilion	Hindu	tilak	mark	was	on	his	forehead.
‘The	tiger	is	the	symbol	of	my	dynasty,	it’s	true,’	Akbar	replied,	‘but	don’t	we	all	admire	the	beast’s
courage	and	strength?	Which	of	us	hasn’t	pitted	himself	against	the	tiger’s	power	and	cunning	in	the	hunt
and	felt	the	glory	of	the	enterprise?	My	hope	is	that	one	day	all	Hindustan	will	embrace	the	tiger	as	an
emblem	of	our	collective	power.’
‘Perhaps	it	will	be	so,	Majesty,’	Bhagwan	Das	responded	enigmatically	as	he	again	looked	up	into	the
sky,	where	now	only	stars	lit	the	soft	darkness.
‘I	 pray	 that	 it	 will,	 and	 that	 you	 and	 I	 will	 ride	 to	 battle	 and	 to	 glory	 together	 many	 times	 as	 true

brothers	in	arms,’	Akbar	persisted,	and	saw	Bhagwan	Das	cast	him	a	swift,	sideways	glance.	Of	all	the
Rajput	 leaders	 he	 had	 summoned	 to	 Agra	 –	 including	 the	 rulers	 of	 Bikaner,	 Jaisalmer	 and	 Gwalior	 –
Bhagwan	Das	was	the	most	powerful.	He	was	also	by	all	accounts	shrewd	and	ambitious	and	no	friend	to
the	 Rana	 of	 Mewar.	 If	 Udai	 Singh	 came	 out	 of	 the	 mountains	 and	 tried	 to	 retake	 his	 lost	 lands,	 Akbar
wanted	to	have	Bhagwan	Das’s	forces	on	the	Moghuls’	side.	And	if	tonight	went	as	he	planned,	Bhagwan
Das	would	indeed	be	his	friend	and	for	ever	.	.	.	Akbar	put	his	arm	around	the	Rajput’s	shoulders.	‘Let	us
now	feast	together,	Bhagwan	Das,	as	true	allies	should.’
Akbar	led	Bhagwan	Das	and	his	other	Rajput	guests	down	to	a	large	rectangular	courtyard.	It	was	lit	by
three	 eight	 foot	 high	 candelabras	 placed	 in	 the	 centre,	 in	 each	 of	 which	 burned	 a	 dozen	 white	 jasminescented	wax	candles	twelve	feet	tall	creating	a	star-like	blaze	of	light.	All	around	the	courtyard,	smaller
candles	flickered	in	jewelled	golden	candlesticks	and	wicks	burned	in	diyas	of	scented	oil.	Silk	carpets
held	 down	 by	 weights	 of	 camel	 bone	 and	 silver	 carved	 into	 the	 shape	 of	 lotus	 leaves	 covered	 the
flagstones,	and	low	tables	with	plump	brocade-covered	bolsters	for	seats	had	been	set	around	three	sides.
On	 the	 fourth	 stood	 a	 wide	 dais	 beneath	 a	 canopy	 of	 green	 velvet	 shot	 through	 with	 golden	 thread.	 A
gilded	throne	stood	upon	it	with	divans,	also	gilded	but	slightly	lower,	arranged	on	either	side.
As	 soon	 as	 Akbar	 and	 his	 Rajput	 guests	 were	 seated	 on	 the	 dais	 and	 their	 courtiers	 had	 arranged
themselves	around	the	tables,	attendants	brought	dishes	piled	with	the	best	food	Akbar’s	kitchens	could
provide	–	roasted	meat	and	game,	stews	simmered	in	spices	and	butter,	rice	scattered	with	dried	fruits
and	 gold	 and	 silverleaf-covered	 nuts,	 fresh-baked	 breads	 –	 including	 the	 Rajput	 delicacies	 of	 corn	 and
millet	rotis	cooked	with	buttermilk	–	grapes,	melons	and	sweetmeats	of	rosewater	and	marzipan.	Looking
around,	Akbar	felt	confident.	There	was	a	sense	of	restraint,	but	that	was	only	natural	–	after	all,	just	a
few	months	ago	he	had	been	at	war	with	several	of	the	rulers	assembled	here	and	some	of	them	had	also
been	at	odds	with	each	other.	The	purpose	of	this	feast	was	to	show	these	Rajput	princes,	the	proudest	of
the	proud,	who	claimed	the	sun	and	the	moon	among	their	ancestors,	that	this	new-found	harmony	was	in
their	interests	as	well	as	his	and	that	as	long	as	they	remained	loyal	to	the	Moghul	throne	they	would	share
in	its	glory.
He	waited	until	attendants	were	passing	round	dishes	of	besan	–	finely	ground	flour	in	which	his	guests
could	 dip	 their	 fingertips	 to	 cleanse	 them	 of	 grease	 –	 and	 brass	 bowls	 of	 scented	 water	 in	 which	 they
could	 rinse	 their	 hands,	 and	 all	 were	 lying	 or	 sitting	 back	 in	 comfortable	 content.	 Then	 he	 rose	 and
holding	up	his	hands	for	silence	began	the	speech	that	he	had	rehearsed	so	carefully,	choosing	words	to
convey	both	his	determination	to	rule	and	his	deep	respect	for	his	guests.
‘My	people	did	not	come	to	Hindustan	as	ravishers	to	despoil	it	and	carry	its	riches	back	to	our	own
lands.	We	came	to	claim	what	is	ours	–	like	a	bridegroom	coming	to	his	long	promised	bride.	Why	do	I
say	that	Hindustan	belongs	to	the	Moghuls?	Because	over	one	hundred	and	sixty	years	ago	my	ancestor
Timur	conquered	it.	Though	he	did	not	stay,	he	appointed	a	vassal	to	rule	as	his	viceroy,	but	over	the	years
usurpers	took	the	land	and,	preoccupied	with	their	own	conflicts	in	the	far	north,	the	Moghuls	could	do
nothing.	Then,	forty	years	ago,	my	grandfather	Babur	returned	and	reclaimed	the	empire.
‘But	I	do	not	regard	Hindustan	as	a	subject	land	or	its	people	as	inferior	to	the	Moghul	clans.	All	races
are	equal	in	my	eyes.	Though	traitors	will	find	no	mercy,	those	who	give	me	their	loyalty	will	prosper.
The	 highest	 offices	 at	 court,	 the	 most	 powerful	 positions	 in	 my	 armies	 will	 be	 theirs	 –	 and	 yours
especially,	 my	 friends	 from	 the	 Rajput	 kingdoms,	 the	 lands	 of	 warriors.	 To	 show	 my	 esteem	 I	 hereby
declare	that	from	this	day	forward	you	will	number	among	my	inner	circle	–	my	ichkis.	I	also	declare	that
you	may	continue	to	hold	your	kingdoms	not	from	me	as	an	overlord	but	as	watan	–	your	own	hereditary
lands	to	bequeath	to	whichever	heirs	you	will.’
As	he	sat	down,	Akbar	glanced	at	Bhagwan	Das,	seated	to	his	right.	‘You	do	us	honour,	Majesty,’	the

Rajput	said.
‘And	 you	 honour	 me	 by	 your	 presence	 here.	 Bhagwan	 Das,	 I	 have	 something	 further	 I	 want	 to	 say.	 I
wish	to	marry.	I	have	heard	of	the	beauty	and	accomplishment	of	your	youngest	sister,	Hirabai.	Will	you
give	her	to	me	as	a	wife?’
For	a	moment	Bhagwan	Das,	shocked,	did	not	answer.	Eventually	he	said,	‘Why	Hirabai,	Majesty?	Out
of	all	the	women	in	your	empire,	why	have	you	chosen	my	sister?’
‘To	show	the	esteem	in	which	I	hold	the	Rajputs.	Of	all	the	peoples	of	Hindustan	you	are	most	like	the
Moghuls	–	forged	in	the	white	heat	of	battle,	proud	and	strong.	And	of	all	the	Rajputs,	you,	Bhagwan	Das
of	Amber,	are	the	foremost.	I	have	already	seen	the	courage	of	your	son	during	the	camel	race.	Your	sister
will,	 I	 am	 sure,	 make	 a	 worthy	 empress.	 And	 –	 let	 us	 be	 frank	 –	 I	 wish	 to	 bind	 my	 allies	 to	 me.	 What
better	way	than	through	marriage?’
‘So	that	is	your	intention	–	to	ally	yourself	with	my	people	through	ties	of	blood	.	.	.?’	Bhagwan	Das
said	slowly,	as	if	assimilating	the	thought	and	weighing	its	merit.
‘Yes.’
‘And	you	will	take	other	wives	also?’
‘Indeed,	as	a	means	of	strengthening	my	empire.	But	I	swear	to	you,	Bhagwan	Das,	that	I	will	always
treat	your	sister	with	the	respect	due	to	a	Rajput	princess	and	the	first	of	my	wives.’
Bhagwan	Das,	though,	was	frowning.	‘It	is	almost	unknown	for	a	Rajput	woman	to	marry	outside	her
people	.	.	.	And	your	own	family	has	never	broken	its	ancestral	blood	ties.’
‘No.	But	I	am	the	first	Moghul	emperor	to	be	born	in	Hindustan,	which	is	both	my	land	and	my	home.
Why	shouldn’t	I	seek	a	Hindustani	wife?’
‘But	we	Rajputs	are	Hindus.	Even	less	than	marry	outside	her	people	can	my	sister	marry	outside	her
religion.	She	cannot	embrace	your	Muslim	faith.’
‘I	would	not	ask	it	of	her.	I	respect	her	religion	which	is	indeed	the	religion	of	many	of	my	subjects.	I
have	never	interfered	with	their	worship,	so	why	should	I	deny	Hirabai	that	freedom?’
Bhagwan	Das’s	aquiline	face	remained	grave	and	Akbar	leaned	closer.	‘I	give	you	my	word	–	the	word
of	an	emperor	–	that	I	will	never	force	her	to	abandon	her	faith,	and	she	may	build	a	shrine	to	pray	to	her
gods	within	the	imperial	haram.’
‘But	perhaps	your	own	family	–	your	nobles	and	your	mullahs	–	will	object?’
Akbar	looked	across	to	where	some	of	his	white-turbaned,	dark-robed	mullahs	were	seated.	‘They	will
come	to	understand	that	it	is	for	the	good	of	the	empire,’	he	said,	then	added	with	steel	in	his	voice:	‘They
will	also	understand	that	it	is	my	will.’
‘Perhaps,	 or	 perhaps	 not	 .	 .	 .	 And	 my	 sister,	 though	 young	 –	 she	 is	 many	 years	 my	 junior	 –	 can	 be
headstrong	and	stubborn	too	.	.	.	she	may	not	feel	.	.	.’
‘Your	sister	will	be	an	empress	and	perhaps	mother	to	the	next	Moghul	emperor	–	as	you	will	be	his
uncle.	Bhagwan	Das,	give	me	your	answer.	Do	not	disappoint	me,	please.’
For	a	moment,	Bhagwan	Das	sat	back,	his	fingers	playing	with	the	triple-stranded	necklace	of	pearls
that	 fell	 almost	 to	 his	 lean	 waist.	 Then,	 finally,	 he	 smiled.	 ‘Majesty,	 you	 honour	 my	 family.	 Hirabai	 is
yours.	May	all	our	gods	smile	on	the	union.’
She	was	sitting	very	still	beneath	her	ruby-coloured	veils,	which	were	shot	through	with	orange	and	gold
thread.	The	only	movement	was	the	trembling	of	the	flowers	and	leaves,	worked	in	gold	wire	and	studded
with	pearls,	set	in	her	headdress	–	a	wedding	gift	from	Akbar.	The	white-clad	Hindu	priest	had	finished
his	part	in	the	ceremony	and	now	it	was	time	for	Akbar’s	mullah	to	recite	verses	from	the	Koran.	As	the

man	slowly	and	sonorously	intoned	the	words,	Akbar	could	see	one	slender	foot	protruding	from	beneath
her	robes.	It	was	decorated	with	henna	in	intricate	spirals.
He	glanced	down	at	his	hands,	also	painted	with	henna	for	good	luck	by	his	mother	and	aunt,	who	were
watching	 the	 ceremony	 through	 a	 screen	 of	 interwoven	 willow	 wands	 designed	 to	 allow	 them	 to	 see
without	being	seen.
Finished	 at	 last,	 the	 mullah	 closed	 the	 ivory	 covers	 of	 his	 book	 and	 handed	 it	 to	 an	 attendant	 who
placed	it	in	a	carved	wooden	box.	Then	the	mullah	picked	up	a	ewer	of	rosewater	and,	as	Akbar	held	out
his	 hands,	 poured	 the	 cool	 water	 over	 them	 to	 symbolise	 cleansing,	 then	 tipped	 what	 was	 left	 into	 a
translucent	agate	cup.	‘Drink,	Majesty,	to	confirm	the	union.’
Akbar	swallowed	a	few	drops	then	held	out	his	hand	to	Hirabai	to	lead	her	to	the	marriage	feast,	to	be
given	 by	 her	 family	 in	 accordance	 with	 Hindu	 custom.	 Akbar	 had	 given	 Bhagwan	 Das	 fine	 and	 richly
furnished	 apartments	 in	 the	 Agra	 fort	 to	 house	 the	 members	 of	 his	 family	 and	 the	 retinue	 that	 had
accompanied	Hirabai	as	she	travelled	in	her	covered	litter	slung	between	two	camels	all	the	way	from
Amber.	 The	 celebrations	 tonight	 would	 signal	 the	 start	 of	 a	 month	 of	 gift-giving,	 processions,	 hunts,
elephant	fights	and	displays	of	martial	skills.	Yet	as	the	wedding	feast	progressed,	all	Akbar’s	thoughts
were	on	the	coming	night	and	he	felt	a	little	uncertain.	The	joyous	giving	and	receiving	of	pleasure	with
his	 concubines	 was	 familiar	 and	 fun.	 In	 their	 soft,	 scented	 arms	 he	 found	 release	 from	 the	 burden	 of
kingship.	But	the	bedding	of	a	virgin	Rajput	princess	was	different.
He	 glanced	 at	 Hirabai	 sitting	 close	 beside	 him,	 still	 hidden	 beneath	 her	 shimmering	 veils.	 For	 the
hundredth	 time,	 he	 wondered	 what	 she	 would	 be	 like.	 Rajput	 women	 were	 renowned	 for	 their	 striking
beauty,	but	even	if	she	didn’t	please	him	it	wasn’t	important,	he	told	himself.	What	mattered	was	that	by
this	marriage	he	had	secured	an	enduring	alliance	with	the	kingdom	of	Amber.	Other	such	political	unions
would	 follow,	 ensuring	 the	 empire’s	 peace	 and	 stability.	 At	 least	 as	 a	 royal	 princess	 Hirabai	 would
understand	the	cares	and	preoccupations	that	came	with	being	a	king.
Akbar	tried	to	attend	to	the	rituals	of	the	feast.	Dancing	girls	from	Amber	clad	in	peacock	blue	whirled
before	him	to	the	wild	rhythms	of	lean,	bare-chested,	orange-turbaned	drummers	and	the	wailing	of	brass
pipes.	Rajput	musicians	sang	in	high-pitched	nasal	voices	of	valour	on	the	battlefield,	acrobats	tumbled
through	 circles	 of	 flaming	 rope	 and	 an	 old	 man	 in	 a	 long	 coat	 inset	 with	 pieces	 of	 mirror	 glass	 that
reflected	the	candle	light	coaxed	a	python	from	a	woven	basket.	He	let	it	coil	itself	around	him	and	even
kissed	its	thick,	scaly	body.
Then	came	the	climax	Akbar	himself	had	planned.	As	the	magician,	uttering	commands	in	some	harshsounding	 language	 Akbar	 had	 never	 heard,	 returned	 the	 hissing	 serpent	 to	 its	 basket,	 Akbar’s	 chief
huntsman	entered	the	chamber.	He	was	leading	a	sinewy,	half-grown	leopard	with	a	collar	of	rubies	and
diamonds	round	its	tawny	neck.	The	teardrop	markings	beneath	its	eyes	had	been	gilded,	making	it	look
like	a	creature	from	some	fable.	Its	tail	lashed	about,	knocking	a	goblet	to	the	ground,	and	the	muscles	in
the	huntsman’s	arms,	left	bare	by	his	leather	jerkin,	bunched	as	he	tightened	his	grip	on	the	leash.
Akbar	rose	and	addressed	Bhagwan	Das.	‘This	is	Jala,	a	cub	sired	by	my	favourite	hunting	leopard.	It
is	my	gift	to	you	on	this	auspicious	occasion.’	The	raja’s	eyes	gleamed.	Akbar	knew	he	loved	the	hunt	as
much	as	he	did,	but,	more	than	that,	leopards	were	rare	and	very	valuable,	truly	imperial	animals.	The	gift
of	one	was	a	great	distinction.	The	raja	seemed	speechless.	‘My	huntsmen	will	continue	to	train	him,	and
when	he	is	ready	I	will	send	him	to	Amber.’	Akbar	went	over	to	Jala	and	cupped	the	animal’s	graceful
head	between	his	hands.	‘Be	as	swift	and	fearless	in	the	hunt	for	your	new	master	as	your	father	has	been
for	me.’
By	the	time	the	wedding	feast	was	ended	the	moon	had	risen,	its	pale,	cold	light	silvering	the	Jumna
river	 where	 it	 flowed	 some	 thirty	 feet	 beneath	 the	 apartments	 in	 the	 haram	 that	 Akbar	 had	 chosen	 for

Hirabai	and	to	which,	preceded	by	musicians,	he	escorted	her.	As	his	attendants	began	to	undress	him,	he
glanced	towards	the	brocaded	screens	embroidered	with	flowers	and	stars	–	the	product	of	the	looms	of
Gujarat	 where	 the	 weavers	 excelled	 at	 such	 things	 –	 behind	 which	 his	 bride	 was	 being	 undressed	 and
anointed	with	perfumed	oils	ready	for	the	marriage	bed.	When	the	last	attendant	had	left,	Akbar	drew	his
loose	green	robe	around	him	and	approached	the	curtains.	Pulling	one	aside,	he	ducked	through.	Hirabai
was	 standing	 with	 her	 back	 to	 him,	 the	 slim	 outline	 of	 her	 body	 visible	 through	 the	 diaphanous	 peachcoloured	muslin	of	her	shift.	Her	hair,	tinted	with	dark	red	henna,	hung	in	shining	waves	to	the	small	of
her	back.	Something	about	the	set	of	her	shoulders	told	him	how	tense	she	was.
‘Hirabai	 .	 .	 .	 Don’t	 be	 afraid.	 You	 have	 nothing	 to	 fear	 from	 me.’	 Akbar	 placed	 both	 hands	 on	 her
shoulders	 and	 turned	 her	 gently	 to	 face	 him.	 Perhaps	 it	 was	 the	 expression	 in	 her	 eyes	 –	 wild	 as	 the
leopard’s	had	been	–	that	gave	him	warning.	As	Hirabai	twisted	from	his	grasp	and	raised	her	right	hand
he	 was	 ready	 for	 her.	 Reacting	 as	 instinctively	 as	 on	 the	 battlefield,	 he	 wrenched	 her	 wrist	 back	 so
sharply	she	cried	out	and	a	small,	broad-bladed	dagger	fell	to	the	ground.
‘Why?’	he	demanded,	still	gripping	her	tightly	by	the	wrist.	‘Why?’	he	shouted	again,	even	louder,	his
face	inches	from	hers,	when	she	didn’t	reply	at	once.
Hirabai’s	eyes,	black	as	her	brother’s,	were	full	of	hatred.	‘Because	you	are	the	enemy	of	my	people	–
the	slayer	of	countless	brave	Rajputs	at	Chittorgarh,	and	their	women	to	whom	you	left	no	option	but	to
save	their	honour	by	making	jauhar.	I	wish	I	could	have	been	with	them.	I	would	have	gone	joyfully	into
the	flames	to	avoid	submitting	to	you.’
Akbar	released	her	and	she	stumbled	back	several	paces	before	regaining	her	balance	and	rubbing	her
right	 wrist.	 His	 eyes	 flickered	 over	 her,	 looking	 for	 any	 other	 weapons,	 but	 near	 naked	 as	 she	 was	 he
could	see	there	were	none.	‘Your	brother	gave	you	to	me	willingly.	Does	he	know	your	feelings?’	A	new
thought	struck	him.	‘Perhaps	he	knew	you	meant	to	kill	me.	Was	he	the	instigator?’
For	the	first	time,	Hirabai	looked	afraid.	‘No.	He	knew	nothing.	He	has	little	time	for	the	women	of	his
family.	Even	the	news	that	I	was	to	become	your	wife	came	to	me	in	a	letter.’
‘I	should	call	the	guards.	Before	the	sun	rises	you	should	meet	your	end.’
‘Do	it,	then.’
‘Is	that	really	what	you	want?	If	the	world	found	out	what	you	tried	to	do,	your	brother	would	live	the
rest	of	his	life	in	shame	and	disgrace.	Who	among	the	other	Rajput	rulers	would	wish	for	contact	with	a
man	whose	sister	had	abandoned	every	concept	of	duty	and	honour?	The	Rajputs	are	renowned	for	their
courage	on	the	battlefield,	not	for	assassination	and	deceit.’
Hirabai	flushed.	For	the	first	time	he	saw	how	beautiful	she	was,	oval	face	delicately	boned	as	a	cat’s
and	soft	skin	the	colour	of	new	honey.	But	she	held	no	charms	for	him.	Striding	over	to	her,	he	gripped	her
shoulders.
‘Listen	 to	 me.	 I	 will	 not	 have	 my	 alliances	 with	 Rajput	 kingdoms	 disrupted	 by	 one	 woman’s	 foolish
delusions.	The	officers	I	executed	after	the	fall	of	Chittorgarh	met	the	end	they	wanted.	Under	your	Rajput
code	it	would	have	been	shameful	to	them	to	live.	Surely	you	understand	that?’	Hirabai	said	nothing,	but
he	felt	her	body	slacken	as	if	the	fight	was	draining	from	her	and	he	relaxed	his	hold.	‘I	will	tell	no	one
what	happened	just	now	and,	if	you	value	your	family’s	honour,	neither	will	you.	You	are	my	wife	and	you
will	do	your	duty.	Do	you	understand	me?’
Hirabai	nodded.
‘In	that	case,	it	is	time	to	perform	your	first	task	as	my	bride.’	Akbar	looked	towards	the	bed.	Hirabai
turned	 away,	 and	 untying	 the	 pearled	 cord	 round	 her	 waist	 let	 her	 robe	 fall	 to	 the	 floor.	 Her	 delicately
curved	body	was	alluring,	but	anger	not	desire	was	what	he	felt	as	he	lowered	himself	on	top	of	her	and
began	to	thrust,	eyes	never	leaving	her	face.	Not	by	a	single	change	in	her	expression	did	she	show	any

pain	or	discomfort	as	he	moved	faster	and	faster	inside	her,	anxious	not	for	pleasure	but	just	to	get	the	task
done.	This	was	not	how	he	had	expected	his	wedding	night	with	his	virgin	bride	to	be.	His	new	wife	had
violated	his	trust	just	as	Adham	Khan	had	done.	Hirabai	was	as	hostile	an	enemy	as	any	he	had	faced	on
the	battlefield.	But	they,	like	Adham	Khan,	had	learned	not	to	defy	him,	and	so	would	she.

Chapter	9

Salim

’m	sorry,	Majesty,	her	monthly	blood	is	flowing.’	The	khawajasara	looked	nervously	at	Akbar	as	if
Hirabai’s	failure	to	conceive	could	somehow	be	blamed	on	her.	‘Her	Highness	remains	melancholy,	as
she	has	been	ever	since	your	marriage.	She	will	hardly	eat.	She	seldom	leaves	her	apartments	to	walk
in	the	haram	gardens.	She	talks	only	with	the	maids	she	brought	with	her	from	Amber	and	keeps	herself
apart	 from	 the	 other	 women,	 never	 joining	 in	 with	 their	 games	 or	 entertainments.	 Perhaps	 she	 has	 a
sickness	.	.	.	Should	I	summon	a	hakim	to	examine	her	again?’
‘No.’	It	was	only	six	weeks	ago	that	an	elderly	doctor,	a	piece	of	cloth	placed	over	his	head	to	conceal
the	 other	 inhabitants	 of	 the	 haram	 from	 his	 aged	 eyes,	 had	 been	 led	 by	 two	 eunuchs	 to	 Hirabai’s
apartments.	Akbar	had	watched	as,	emerging	from	under	the	cloth	like	a	tortoise	poking	its	head	from	its
shell,	the	hakim	had	examined	Hirabai,	running	his	hands	over	her	body	beneath	her	loose	cotton	shift.	‘I
can	 find	 nothing	 wrong,	 Majesty,’	 he	 had	 said	 at	 last.	 ‘The	 entrance	 to	 her	 womb	 is	 strong	 and	 well
formed.’
Akbar	looked	broodingly	at	the	khawajasara,	tall,	big-boned,	well	fleshed	and	handsome	despite	her
forty	or	so	years,	who	had	become	superintendent	of	the	haram	on	the	retirement	of	the	woman	who	had
brought	him	Mayala	all	those	years	ago.	But	it	was	Hirabai	he	saw	before	his	eyes.	Every	time	he	made
love	to	her	he	hoped	for	some	change,	but	always	she	lay	limp	and	unresponsive.	Her	passivity	disturbed
him	more	than	if	she	had	tried	to	fight	him	off.	Did	she	still	dream	of	stabbing	him?	He	had	ordered	the
khawajasara	 to	 ensure	 there	 was	 nothing	 sharp	 in	 the	 empress’s	 apartments.	 The	 superintendent	 had
looked	at	him	a	little	curiously	but	had	of	course	obeyed.	It	was	as	much	for	Hirabai’s	protection	as	for
his	 own	 –	 sometimes	 he	 feared	 she	 might	 try	 to	 harm	 herself.	 He	 had	 had	 her	 apartments	 moved	 to	 a
double-tiered	pavilion	that,	though	overlooking	the	Jumna,	had	windows	inset	with	fretted	marble	screens
from	which	it	was	impossible	to	jump.
‘Majesty?’
He	had	forgotten	the	khawajasara	was	still	there.	‘You	are	dismissed.	Come	to	me	again	next	month
when	–	God	willing	–	you	may	bring	better	news.’
Akbar	sat	alone	for	a	while.	Outside	the	sky	was	fresh	and	clear.	The	rains	were	over	and	he	should
have	 been	 out	 hunting	 or	 hawking.	 Why	 did	 thoughts	 of	 Hirabai	 preoccupy	 him?	 It	 wasn’t	 love,	 but
perhaps	it	was	pride	.	.	.	All	the	court	must	know	things	were	amiss	between	the	emperor	and	his	bride.
They	never	ate	or	spent	time	together	except	for	his	nocturnal	visits	to	her	bed.	Even	then,	as	soon	as	he
was	finished	he	returned	to	his	own	apartments.	He	had	never	woken	in	her	arms	as	the	pale	dawn	light
came	slanting	in.
Perhaps	 his	 mother	 would	 have	 some	 words	 of	 wisdom	 –	 or	 at	 least	 of	 comfort.	 Till	 now	 he	 had
hesitated	to	confide	in	her,	hoping	each	month	to	hear	that	Hirabai	was	pregnant.	But	time	was	passing.	He
was	being	distracted	from	the	matters	that	should	be	occupying	his	mind,	and	–	if	the	stories	the	elderly
Jauhar	had	told	him	were	true	–	something	yet	more	pernicious	was	gathering	momentum.	Bhagwan	Das
had	been	right	to	predict	that	Akbar’s	marriage	to	a	non-Muslim	would	be	criticised.	The	mullahs	were

‘I

whispering	that	Akbar’s	childless	state	was	a	punishment	for	marrying	an	infidel	Hindu.
Hamida	was	reading,	but	seeing	Akbar	she	put	her	book	of	poetry	down.	‘What	is	it?	You	look	troubled.’
‘The	khawajasara	has	just	made	her	report	to	me.’
‘And?’
‘Hirabai	has	still	not	conceived.’
‘You	must	be	patient.	Remember	you	have	only	been	married	six	months.’
‘That’s	what	I	tell	myself.	But	how	much	longer	will	I	have	to	wait?’
‘You	are	a	young	man.	You	will	take	other	wives.	There	will	be	children	–	sons	–	even	if	they	are	not
Hirabai’s.’
‘It’s	not	just	a	matter	of	my	own	impatience.	Jauhar	came	to	me	two	weeks	ago.	Since	I	made	him	my
vizier	he	is	even	better	informed	about	what	is	being	said	around	the	court.’
‘Court	gossip	doesn’t	matter.’
‘This	does.	Some	of	the	senior	clerics	–	the	ulama	–	are	claiming	that	Hirabai	will	never	bear	a	child.
They	say	it’s	God’s	judgement	on	me	for	my	crime	against	Islam	in	marrying	an	unbeliever.’
‘You	rule	the	empire,	not	the	ulama.’
‘I’m	not	afraid	of	them	or	of	their	narrow	prejudices.	At	first,	I	admit,	I	did	wonder	whether	there	was
anything	 in	 their	 words,	 but	 the	 more	 I	 thought	 about	 it	 the	 more	 impossible	 I	 found	 it	 to	 believe	 that	 a
merciful,	compassionate	God	would	reject	people	simply	because	they	hold	different	beliefs.	But	some	of
my	subjects	may	begin	to	heed	their	arguments,	however	absurd.	This	could	sow	hatred	and	division.	The
ulama	know	perfectly	well	why	I	married	a	Hindu	–	not	only	to	strengthen	a	military	alliance	but	to	show
that	all	can	prosper	under	the	Moghuls	regardless	of	religion	.	.	.’
‘You	are	wise,’	Hamida	said.	‘You	see	potential	dangers	early.’
‘That’s	what	my	father	encouraged	me	to	do.	He	said	he	hadn’t	understood	the	threat	his	half-brothers
posed	until	it	was	nearly	too	late.’
‘That	is	true.	It	almost	cost	us	our	lives.’
‘I	mustn’t	make	the	same	mistake,	even	though	the	dangers	I	face	are	different.’
‘Tell	 me	 about	 Hirabai.	 I	 know	 you	 are	 unhappy	 .	 .	 .	 forgive	 me,	 but	 I	 hear	 things,	 and	 so	 does
Gulbadan.	Does	Hirabai	not	please	you?’
‘She	hates	me.’
‘Why	should	she?’
‘She	blames	me	for	executing	Rajput	officers	at	Chittorgarh	and	for	razing	the	fortress	.	.	.	she	thinks	of
me	as	the	destroyer	of	her	people.’
‘How	can	she,	when	her	own	brother	is	glad	to	call	himself	your	ally?’
Akbar	shrugged.	‘I	think	she	despises	him	for	it	.	.	.	but	she	won’t	discuss	her	feelings.’
‘Are	 you	 sure	 you	 understand	 her	 properly?	 Perhaps	 she	 finds	 our	 court	 alien	 and	 is	 homesick	 for
Rajasthan.	In	time	she	may	change.’
‘I	do	understand	her,	Mother.	On	our	wedding	night	she	tried	to	stab	me.’	Akbar	had	not	meant	to	say	it
but	the	words	were	out	before	he	could	stop	them.
‘She	 did	 what?’	 Any	 sympathy	 for	 her	 daughter-in-law	 vanished	 from	 Hamida’s	 face	 and	 her	 eyes
flashed.	‘Then	you	should	have	had	her	executed,	just	as	your	father	should	have	killed	his	brothers	when
they	first	rebelled	.	.	.	You	said	you	had	learned	from	his	mistakes,	yet	you	lie	with	a	woman	who	wishes
you	dead.	I	don’t	understand.’
‘I	knew	you	wouldn’t.	That	was	why	I	didn’t	tell	you.	I	have	kept	Hirabai	as	my	wife	because	of	what

it	 symbolises	 to	 my	 people.	 The	 alliance	 has	 pleased	 the	 Rajputs.	 Had	 I	 rejected	 or	 executed	 her	 how
could	our	alliance	have	held?	And	Hirabai’s	freedom	to	worship	her	gods	is	living	proof	that	my	Hindu
subjects	 have	 nothing	 to	 fear	 from	 me.	 The	 wider	 world	 knows	 nothing	 of	 our	 lives	 at	 court.	 They	 see
simply	that	the	Moghul	emperor	has	taken	a	royal	Hindu	bride	and	they	rejoice.’
Hamida	was	silent,	her	fine	brow	wrinkled	in	thought.	‘Perhaps	you	are	right,’	she	said	at	last.	‘Shock
and	maternal	anger	made	me	speak	as	I	did.	I	will	reveal	to	no	one	–	not	even	Gulbadan	–	what	you	have
just	told	me,	but	my	attendants	will	watch	Hirabai	and	make	sure	that	she	is	doing	nothing	to	prevent	or	to
end	a	pregnancy.	Many	such	tricks	are	known	in	the	haram	–	potions	of	bitter	herbs,	sponges	soaked	in
vinegar	 and	 pushed	 deep	 inside	 before	 intercourse,	 even	 twigs	 wrapped	 in	 sheep’s	 wool	 and	 inserted
afterwards	to	scour	the	womb	–	and	the	Rajput	women	too	may	have	their	methods.’
‘She	is	already	watched.	The	khawajasara,	 observing	 through	 her	 jali	 screen,	 records	 our	 couplings
and	is	looking	for	signs	of	anything	untoward	.	.	.	I	only	hope	it	isn’t	hatred	that	prevents	Hirabai	from
conceiving.	She	is	strong-willed	and	the	mind	can	rule	the	body.	Sometimes	I	worry	that	even	if	she	did
bear	me	a	child	such	a	birth	could	not	be	auspicious.’
‘That	is	foolish,	Akbar.	And	who	knows	.	.	.	Hirabai	is	very	young.	With	a	child	she	may	change	.	.	.’
‘She’s	not	as	young	as	you	were	when	you	married	my	father.’
‘I	 was	 lucky.	 Your	 father	 chose	 me	 out	 of	 love	 and	 I	 loved	 him.	 Also,	 I	 was	 only	 the	 daughter	 of	 a
nobleman.	I	wasn’t	royal	like	Hirabai	with	all	the	weight	of	an	ancient	lineage	on	my	shoulders.	Things
were	perhaps	simpler	for	your	father	and	me.’
‘Even	though	you	endured	so	much	hardship	and	danger?’
‘Perhaps	because	of	it,	who	knows?’	For	the	first	time	since	he	had	told	her	of	Hirabai’s	hatred	of	him,
Hamida’s	face	softened.	She	was	thinking	of	Humayun,	he	was	sure.	Would	he	ever	feel	for	a	woman	the
kind	of	love	that	had	existed	between	his	parents?
‘Akbar,	perhaps	I	can	help	you.	Gulbadan	has	told	me	of	a	Sufi	mystic,	Shaikh	Salim	Chishti.	She	has
visited	 him	 and	 says	 that,	 just	 as	 my	 own	 grandfather	 did,	 he	 has	 the	 power	 to	 see	 into	 the	 future	 .	 .	 .
Perhaps	he	can	tell	you	something	to	ease	your	mind.’
‘Where	does	this	Sufi	live?’
‘In	Sikri,	not	far	from	here.’
‘I	know	it.	I	stopped	there	once	to	drink	from	a	well	while	out	hunting.’
‘Perhaps	I	am	wrong	to	suggest	it.	Your	father	in	his	youth	became	so	preoccupied	with	what	the	stars
could	tell	him	about	the	future	that	he	failed	to	see	the	dangers	lurking	around	him.	Sometimes	it	is	better
not	to	know	what	the	future	holds.’
‘No,	I	want	to	know.	Then	I	can	plan	for	it.’
Akbar	 led	 his	 small	 troop	 along	 the	 dusty	 road	 and	 up	 the	 plateau	 towards	 Sikri.	 Two	 of	 his	 favourite
hunting	 dogs	 were	 running	 alongside,	 pink	 tongues	 lolling,	 and	 his	 only	 escort	 apart	 from	 a	 few
bodyguards	were	two	huntsmen	and	his	qorchi.	A	young	deer	he	had	shot	as	it	burst	from	a	thicket	was
already	on	its	way	to	Agra,	slung	across	the	saddle	of	another	huntsman	he	had	sent	back	with	it.	It	was
sensible	to	maintain	the	fiction	that	this	was	a	hunting	party,	Akbar	thought.	He	didn’t	want	it	known	that
he	was	consulting	a	mystic.
Ahead,	through	the	shimmering	midday	heat	haze,	he	saw	the	outline	of	the	cluster	of	mud-brick	houses
on	 the	 edge	 of	 the	 plateau	 that	 was	 Sikri.	 ‘We’ll	 rest	 there	 until	 the	 heat	 abates	 a	 little,’	 he	 said	 to	 his
qorchi.	‘I’ve	heard	stories	of	a	Sufi	mystic	who	lives	in	this	village	and	I’m	curious	to	see	him.	Ride	up
there	and	ask	him	if	the	emperor	may	visit	him.’

As	 the	 youth	 galloped	 ahead,	 Akbar	 followed	 more	 slowly,	 trotting	 up	 the	 steep	 slope	 and	 into	 the
village	where	he	dismounted	in	a	pool	of	green-black	shade	beneath	the	dense	foliage	of	a	mango	tree.	A
few	minutes	later,	he	saw	his	qorchi	returning.
‘Majesty,	Shaikh	Salim	Chishti	bids	you	welcome.	Come	this	way.’
Akbar	followed	his	squire	through	the	village	to	a	low	single-storey	house	with	only	two	slits	on	either
side	of	the	door	for	windows.	Ducking	inside,	for	a	moment	he	found	himself	in	darkness.	Then,	as	his
eyes	 adjusted,	 he	 made	 out	 an	 old	 man	 dressed	 entirely	 in	 robes	 of	 rough-spun	 white	 wool	 kneeling	 in
prayer,	head	to	the	floor	and	facing	in	the	direction	of	Mecca.
‘Forgive	me,	Majesty,	I	was	praying	to	God	for	guidance	so	that	I	may	help	you.’	As	he	spoke	the	old
man	picked	up	a	tinder	box	and	with	swift,	efficient	movements	lit	a	candle	in	a	clay	holder.	In	the	faint
light	Akbar	saw	a	face	crinkled	as	a	walnut.
‘How	did	you	know	I’ve	come	for	help?’	he	asked,	looking	around	him.	The	room	was	almost	empty
except	for	the	dark	red	prayer	rug,	a	rough-hewn	wooden	chest	and	the	string	charpoy	that	was	the	Sufi’s
bed.
‘Everyone	 who	 seeks	 me	 is	 hoping	 for	 divine	 assistance,	 even	 though	 they	 may	 tell	 themselves	 they
have	 only	 come	 out	 of	 curiosity.	 You	 look	 surprised,	 Majesty.	 Perhaps	 you	 think	 I	 claim	 too	 much	 for
myself?	I	did	not	ask	for	my	powers,	but	I	know	that	by	God’s	divine	grace	I	can	sometimes	be	a	conduit
to	him.	Come	and	sit	in	front	of	me	where	I	can	see	you.’
Akbar	squatted	down	on	a	piece	of	woven	matting.	For	several	minutes	the	Sufi	said	nothing,	but	his
eyes,	the	irises	curiously	luminous	like	an	owl’s,	looked	hard	at	Akbar,	as	if	trying	to	divine	his	innermost
thoughts.	Then,	swaying	gently,	long,	slender	hands	folded	against	his	chest,	he	began	to	intone,	repeating
over	and	over,	‘Give	me	your	wisdom,	show	me	the	way.’	When	was	the	holy	man	going	to	ask	him	why
he’d	come?	Akbar	wondered.	But	as	he	waited	a	sense	of	peace	and	tranquillity	began	to	possess	him.
His	 eyes	 were	 closing	 and	 his	 body	 and	 mind	 beginning	 to	 relax,	 cares	 and	 anxieties,	 desires	 and
ambitions	rolling	away	until	he	felt	unsullied	and	carefree	as	a	child.
‘We	 are	 ready	 to	 begin.’	 The	 Sufi	 reached	 out	 a	 hand	 and	 gently	 touched	 Akbar’s	 shoulder.	 Akbar
opened	his	eyes	with	a	start,	wondering	how	long	he	had	been	in	that	half-dreaming	state	that	had	been	so
strangely	pleasurable.	‘What	is	it	you	wish	to	know,	Majesty?’
‘Whether	my	wife	will	bear	me	a	son.’
‘Is	that	all?	That	is	a	simple	question.’
‘Perhaps	not	so	simple.	You	know	that	the	empress	is	a	Hindu?’
‘Of	course,	Majesty.	All	of	Hindustan	knows	that.’
‘As	 a	 Muslim	 yourself,	 do	 you	 believe	 her	 childlessness	 could	 be	 God’s	 way	 of	 punishing	 me	 for
marrying	an	unbeliever?’
‘No.	As	a	Sufi	I	believe	there	are	many	roads	to	God	and	that	it	is	for	each	of	us	to	find	him.’
‘Whatever	our	faith?’
‘Yes.	God	belongs	to	us	all.’
That	 was	 true,	 Akbar	 thought,	 gazing	 into	 the	 Sufi’s	 searching	 yellow	 eyes.	 He	 had	 been	 foolish	 to
wonder	even	for	a	moment	whether	there	was	any	truth	in	what	the	ulama	were	alleging.	Perhaps	he	had
been	equally	foolish	to	fear	that	Hirabai’s	antipathy	towards	him	was	the	reason	she	hadn’t	conceived	.	.	.
Things	he’d	never	thought	his	pride	or	his	position	would	allow	him	to	reveal	to	a	stranger	came	tumbling
out.
‘She	doesn’t	love	me.	Each	time	I	lie	with	her	I	see	her	contempt	for	me	.	.	.	I	have	tried	to	be	good	to
her	.	.	.’
But	the	Sufi	raised	his	hand.	‘Move	closer.’

Akbar	 leaned	 forward	 and	 the	 Sufi	 took	 his	 face	 in	 his	 hands	 and	 pulled	 it	 gently	 towards	 him	 until
Akbar’s	 forehead	 was	 resting	 against	 his	 own.	 Again	 a	 wondrous	 sense	 of	 well-being	 flooded	 through
Akbar	and	his	mind	felt	bathed	in	light.
‘You	needn’t	fear,	Majesty.	Your	wife	will	soon	bear	you	a	fine	son.	And	you	will	have	two	more	sons.
The	Moghul	bloodline	will	flourish	here	in	Hindustan	for	many	generations,	nourished	by	your	conquests
and	your	vision	of	a	powerful	and	united	empire.’
‘Thank	you,	Shaikh	Salim	Chishti.	Thank	you.’	Akbar	bowed	his	head.	His	confidence	was	renewed,
his	 self-doubts	 stilled.	 Everything	 would	 be	 as	 he	 wished,	 he	 was	 certain.	 He	 would	 build	 a	 mighty
empire,	 with	 sons	 to	 help	 him,	 and	 when	 he	 died	 they	 would	 continue	 his	 work	 .	 .	 .	 the	 dynasty	 would
flourish.	 ‘When	 what	 you	 say	 comes	 to	 pass,	 I	 will	 found	 a	 great	 city	 here	 at	 Sikri	 to	 honour	 you.	 Its
gardens	 and	 fountains	 and	 palaces	 will	 be	 a	 wonder	 of	 the	 world	 and	 I	 will	 move	 my	 court	 here	 from
Agra.’
‘When	your	wife	conceives,	send	her	here.	Outside	the	village	is	a	small	monastery	where	she	will	be
cared	 for,	 and	 perhaps	 away	 from	 the	 court	 her	 mind	 will	 grow	 calmer	 and	 she	 can	 prepare	 for
motherhood	more	easily.’
‘Could	she	practise	her	religion	here?’
‘Of	course.	As	I	told	you,	many	paths	lead	to	God	and	to	the	knowledge	of	ourselves	and	the	universe
we	crave.	We	must	each	choose	our	own.’
‘Then	I	will	indeed	send	her	here.’	Akbar	rose.	‘Thank	you.	You	have	brought	me	comfort	and	hope.’
‘I	am	glad.	But	there	is	something	else	I	should	tell	you,	and	this	time	you	may	not	welcome	it.’
‘What	is	it?’	Akbar	placed	his	hand	gently	on	the	old	man’s	shoulder,	still	sinewy	and	strong	beneath
his	coarse	woollen	robe.
‘Though	 you	 will	 have	 three	 strong	 sons,	 remember	 that	 love	 of	 power,	 the	 desire	 to	 possess	 it,	 can
poison	even	the	closest	family	bonds.	Do	not	take	the	love	of	your	sons	for	you	–	or	for	each	other	–	for
granted.’
‘What	do	you	mean?	Are	you	speaking	of	family	rivalries	like	those	my	father	endured?’
‘I’m	not	sure,	Majesty.	Though	I	foresee	that	you	will	have	sons	and	your	empire	will	flourish,	beyond
that	I	see	shadows.	They	are	as	yet	without	shape,	but	perhaps	they	carry	a	warning.	Be	vigilant,	Majesty.
Remember	 my	 words.	 Keep	 watch	 over	 your	 sons	 as	 they	 grow	 to	 manhood	 so	 you	 can	 dispel	 those
shadows	before	they	take	substance	and	do	harm	.	.	.’
Riding	back	towards	Agra	later	that	day,	Akbar	pondered	the	Sufi’s	warning.	So	many	times	since	the
days	of	his	ancestor	Timur	the	Moghuls	had	almost	destroyed	themselves	by	turning	on	each	other	rather
than	their	enemies.	He	would	watch	for	the	signs	and	be	on	his	guard.	But	all	that	lay	far	off	in	the	future.
Buoyed	by	the	thought	of	three	sons	Akbar	urged	his	horse	to	a	yet	faster	pace.
Six	weeks	later	the	khawajasara’s	delighted	face	told	Akbar	everything	he	needed	to	know.
‘Majesty,	at	last	it	has	happened.’
‘When	will	the	child	be	born?’
‘The	hakim	says	in	August.’
‘I	 will	 go	 to	 the	 haram	 now.’	 Akbar	 struggled	 to	 restrain	 tears	 of	 joy	 as	 he	 half	 ran	 to	 the	 women’s
quarters.	 When	 he	 entered	 Hirabai’s	 apartments	 he	 smelled	 the	 familiar	 sweet	 spiciness	 of	 the	 incense
sticks	 she	 always	 kept	 burning	 in	 a	 brass	 pot	 before	 a	 statue	 of	 an	 unsmiling,	 many-armed	 goddess.
Hirabai	was	sitting	on	a	low,	lacquered	Rajput	stool	as	one	of	her	maids	combed	out	her	thick	hennaed
hair.	It	seemed	to	Akbar	that	his	wife’s	face,	grown	so	angular	and	drawn,	was	already	softening	and	that

her	skin	had	a	new	bloom.	Yet	if	he’d	hoped	for	any	softening	in	her	manner	to	him	he	was	disappointed.
Her	expression	as	she	looked	up	at	him	was	as	distant	and	unyielding	as	ever.
‘Leave	us,’	Akbar	ordered	the	maid.	As	soon	as	they	were	alone,	he	asked,	‘Is	it	true?	You	really	are
pregnant?’
‘Yes.	Surely	the	khawajasara	told	you.’
‘I	wanted	to	hear	it	from	my	wife	as	a	husband	should.	Hirabai	–	you	are	carrying	my	child,	perhaps	the
future	Moghul	emperor.	Is	there	nothing	I	can	do	or	say	to	make	you	look	more	kindly	on	me	or	to	make
you	happier?’
‘The	only	way	would	be	to	send	me	back	to	Amber,	but	that	is	impossible.’
‘You	will	be	a	mother	soon.	Does	that	mean	nothing	to	you?’
Hirabai	hesitated.	‘I	will	love	the	child	because	the	blood	of	my	people	will	flow	through	its	veins.	But
I	 will	 not	 pretend	 to	 feelings	 for	 you	 that	 I	 can	 never	 have.	 All	 I	 pray	 is	 that	 you	 take	 other	 wives	 and
leave	me	in	peace.’
‘Bear	me	a	healthy	son	and	I	promise	never	to	lie	with	you	again.’	Hirabai	said	nothing.	‘I	want	you	to
make	ready	for	a	journey	a	week	from	now.’
‘Where	are	you	sending	me?’	For	the	first	time	her	cold	demeanour	faltered	and	she	looked	anxious.
‘Don’t	be	afraid.	I	wish	you	to	go	to	a	place	of	good	omen	–	Sikri.	I	did	not	tell	you	this	before	because
I	know	you	distrust	my	religion,	but	a	Muslim	mystic	lives	there.	He	predicted	you	would	bear	me	a	son
and	asked	me	to	send	you	there,	to	a	monastery	where	you	will	be	well	tended	until	the	child	is	born.	I
will	send	the	best	of	my	hakims	with	you	and	you	may	take	all	the	attendants	you	wish.	The	air	is	good
there	–	cooler	and	healthier	than	in	Agra.	It	will	be	beneficial	for	you	and	the	child	you	carry	and	you	may
worship	your	own	gods	there.’
Hirabai	looked	down	at	her	hands	folded	on	her	lap.	‘It	will	be	as	you	wish,	of	course.’
‘Shall	I	send	word	to	your	brother?’
Hirabai	nodded.	Akbar	waited	a	few	moments,	hoping	she	might	say	something	else.	‘I	will	love	the
child,’	she	had	said,	but	would	she?	If	she	hated	the	father,	what	affection	could	she	feel	for	the	son?	For	a
moment	 he	 pondered	 the	 Sufi’s	 warning.	 Was	 his	 wife’s	 hostility	 one	 of	 the	 distant	 shadows	 he	 had
glimpsed?	With	a	last	searching	look	at	Hirabai’s	half-averted	face,	he	left	her.	Free	from	the	frigid	aura
surrounding	her,	he	felt	the	warmth	of	his	happiness	returning.	He	was	going	to	have	a	son	.	.	.
‘I	name	you	Salim	after	the	holy	man	who	predicted	your	birth.’
Holding	the	squirming	body	of	his	new-born	son	in	the	crook	of	his	left	arm,	with	his	right	hand	Akbar
picked	 up	 a	 saucer	 of	 small	 gold	 coins	 and	 poured	 them	 gently	 over	 the	 baby’s	 head.	 Salim	 threshed
about,	 flexing	 tiny	 fists,	 but	 though	 he	 screwed	 up	 his	 face	 he	 didn’t	 howl.	 Smiling	 with	 pride,	 Akbar
lifted	Salim	high	so	all	could	see	him.	Then	he	placed	him	on	a	large	green	velvet	cushion	held	by	his
elderly	vizier	Jauhar.	It	was	the	turn	of	the	black-turbaned	Shaikh	Ahmad,	head	of	the	ulama,	 to	 speak.
What	did	he	really	think	about	blessing	the	child	of	a	Hindu	mother?	His	face,	bland	above	his	bushy	dark
beard,	gave	nothing	away.	Whatever	his	inner	feelings,	he	and	his	clique	had	lost	the	battle	–	defeated	by
the	birth	of	this	child	who	as	yet	knew	nothing	of	the	tensions	of	the	world.
After	 thanking	 God	 for	 Salim’s	 birth,	 the	 priest	 said	 portentously:	 ‘We	 whom	 His	 Imperial	 Majesty
have	summoned	here	to	Sikri	hail	the	auspicious	birth	of	this	world-illuminating	pearl	of	the	mansion	of
dominion	and	fortune,	this	night-gleaming	jewel	of	the	casket	of	greatness	and	glory.	Prince	Salim,	may
God	guide	you	and	pour	an	ocean	of	divine	bounty	upon	you.’
Later	that	night,	Akbar	slipped	from	the	huge	many-canopied	brocade	tent	specially	erected	in	Sikri	for

the	feast	celebrating	his	son’s	birth.	For	a	while	he	had	joined	in	the	slurred	singing,	circling	arm	in	arm
with	 Ahmed	 Khan	 and	 his	 other	 commanders	 in	 some	 semblance	 of	 the	 old	 dances	 of	 the	 Moghul
homelands	–	not	that	many	could	remember	the	steps.	But	now	there	was	something	he	felt	he	must	do.
Calling	for	his	horse,	he	mounted	and	taking	only	a	few	of	his	guards,	rode	slowly	through	the	warm	night
air,	 scented	 by	 the	 still-smoking	 dung	 fires	 over	 which	 the	 villagers	 of	 Sikri	 had	 cooked	 their	 evening
meal,	towards	the	nearby	monastery	where	Hirabai	was	still	lodged.	Glancing	up	it	seemed	to	him	that	the
stars,	so	beloved	by	his	own	father	Humayun,	had	never	seemed	so	numerous	or	so	lustrous.	It	was	as	if
they	 had	 found	 a	 special	 radiance	 to	 shed	 upon	 the	 earth	 that	 now	 held	 his	 son	 –	 the	 son	 he	 must	 do
everything	to	protect.	Even	now,	at	a	time	of	so	much	happiness,	he	could	not	forget	the	Sufi’s	words	of
caution	.	.	.
‘It	is	the	emperor!’	shouted	one	of	his	guards	as	the	arched	entrance	of	the	monastery	appeared	before
them.	Orange-clad	Rajput	soldiers	from	Amber	to	whom	Akbar	had	awarded	the	honour	of	protecting	the
Empress	stood	to	attention	and	their	captain	stepped	forward.
‘Welcome,	Majesty.’
Akbar	dismounted	and	tossing	his	reins	to	his	qorchi	walked	through	the	gateway	into	a	small,	dimly	lit
courtyard.	As	the	cry	went	up	again,	‘It	is	the	emperor!’	one	of	Hirabai’s	Rajput	maids	appeared	through
the	shadows	carrying	an	oil	lamp	whose	tiny	flame	flickered	and	danced.
‘Please	take	me	to	my	wife.’
Hirabai	was	lying	propped	on	blue	cotton	cushions	on	a	low	bed.	Salim	was	feeding	at	her	breast	and
Akbar	 saw	 a	 contentment	 in	 her	 face	 he	 had	 never	 witnessed	 before.	 It	 was	 so	 unexpected	 it	 made	 her
seem	almost	a	stranger.	But	as	she	looked	at	him,	the	glow	faded.	‘Why	have	you	come?	You	should	be	at
the	feast	attending	to	your	guests.’
‘I	felt	a	sudden	need	to	see	my	son	.	.	.	and	my	wife.’
Hirabai	said	nothing,	but	took	Salim	from	her	breast	and	handed	him	to	her	maid.	The	baby	began	to
cry,	angry	at	having	his	feeding	so	abruptly	ended,	but	Hirabai	signalled	to	the	maid	to	take	him	away.
‘Hirabai	–	I	have	come	here	to	make	one	last	appeal	to	you.	For	the	rest	of	our	lives	Salim	will	be	a
link	of	flesh	and	blood	between	us.	Can’t	we	forget	the	past	and	begin	again	for	him?	Let	all	my	sons	be
yours	too	so	that	in	later	life	they	can	support	and	help	one	another	as	full	brothers.’
‘I	have	done	my	duty.	As	I	have	already	told	you,	I	wish	you	only	to	leave	me	alone.	You	promised	that
if	I	bore	you	a	son	you	would	do	so.	Let	other	women	father	your	sons.’
‘Salim’s	position	will	be	less	secure	if	he	has	only	half-brothers.	They	will	feel	less	loyalty	to	him.
Have	you	considered	that?	Don’t	you	owe	it	to	your	son	to	make	his	position	as	strong	as	possible?’
‘My	son	has	Rajput	blood	in	his	veins.	He	will	trample	any	rival	into	the	dust.’	Hirabai	raised	her	chin.
Frustration	 at	 such	 heedless,	 stubborn	 pride,	 such	 a	 narrow	 view	 of	 the	 world,	 filled	 Akbar.	 For	 a
moment	he	wondered	whether	to	tell	her	of	the	Sufi’s	warnings	of	what	might	lie	in	the	future,	but	he	knew
she	wouldn’t	listen.	So	be	it,	but	he	would	not	leave	his	son	to	be	brought	up	by	such	a	woman.
‘Very	well,	I	will	respect	your	wishes.	But	there	is	a	price	for	what	you	ask.	Though	you	may	see	Salim
whenever	you	wish,	I	intend	to	place	him	in	my	mother’s	care.	Moghul	princes	are	often	reared	by	senior
royal	women	rather	than	their	birth	mothers.	She	will	appoint	a	milk-mother	as	is	also	the	Moghul	way.
My	son	will	be	brought	up	as	a	Moghul	prince,	not	a	Rajput	one.’
Hirabai	 stared	 at	 him.	 If	 he	 had	 anticipated	 grief,	 remonstrations,	 he	 was	 wrong.	 The	 only	 sign	 of
agitation	 was	 a	 slight	 tautening	 of	 her	 jaw.	 ‘You	 are	 the	 emperor.	 Your	 word	 is	 law.’	 Her	 tone	 was
contemptuous,	 insolent	 even.	 He	 had	 come	 to	 her	 tonight	 to	 give	 her	 one	 final	 chance,	 but,	 as	 he	 had
known	in	his	heart,	she	had	utterly	closed	her	mind	against	him.

Chapter	10

A	Wonder	of	the	World

ou	have	done	me	a	great	honour	and	given	me	a	great	responsibility,	Majesty.’
‘I	 know	 you	 will	 acquit	 yourself	 well,	 Abul	 Fazl.	 I	 wish	 the	 chronicle	 of	 my	 reign	 to	 be	 a
testament	to	future	generations.	You	must	record	the	truth	–	the	bad	as	well	as	the	good.	Don’t	seek
merely	to	flatter	me.’
‘I	will	write	every	word	with	a	pen	perfumed	with	sincerity.’
Akbar	suppressed	a	smile	as	he	looked	at	his	newly	appointed	chief	chronicler.	Though	he	had	other
scribes,	he	had	begun	to	feel	the	need	for	someone	who	would	do	more	than	just	write	down	his	words	–
someone	 he	 could	 trust	 to	 inform	 himself	 about	 and	 record	 all	 the	 important	 aspects	 of	 his	 reign,	 even
when	he	himself	was	away.	Abul	Fazl	was	a	bull-necked,	bow-legged	man	a	little	younger	than	himself
with	 a	 small	 but	 livid	 birthmark	 at	 the	 corner	 of	 his	 left	 eye.	 His	 father	 Shaikh	 Mubarak,	 a	 learned
theologian,	 had	 brought	 the	 family	 to	 the	 Moghul	 court	 some	 years	 earlier.	 Abul	 Fazl’s	 skills	 both	 as	 a
commander	and	as	an	analyst	of	court	politics	had	already	caught	Akbar’s	attention,	but	it	was	his	vizier
Jauhar	 who	 had	 recommended	 him	 for	 this	 appointment,	 observing	 to	 Akbar	 that	 ‘although	 vain	 and	 an
outrageous	flatterer,	Abul	Fazl	is	clever	and	loyal.	He	will	glory	at	being	at	the	centre	of	events	and	will
perform	the	task	more	ably	than	a	more	modest	or	retiring	man.’	Certainly	the	beaming	smile	on	his	cleanshaven	face	told	Akbar	how	gratified	he	was	by	the	award	of	such	a	position	of	trust.
‘You	must	take	particular	care	in	recording	the	reforms	I	intend	to	make	to	the	empire’s	administration.
One	of	the	chief	purposes	of	the	chronicles	will	be	to	guide	my	successors.’
‘Of	 course,	 Majesty.’	 Abul	 Fazl	 signalled	 with	 a	 richly	 beringed	 hand	 to	 an	 attendant	 who	 placed	 a
carved	mulberry	wood	writing	slope	before	him	and	handed	him	paper,	pen	and	ink.
‘Then	let	us	begin.’	Akbar	got	up	and	paced	his	apartments.	Through	an	arched	opening	he	could	see
boys	riding	their	camels	along	the	sunlit	banks	of	the	Jumna	and	beyond	them	a	group	of	his	courtiers,	one
with	 a	 hawk	 on	 his	 wrist,	 going	 hunting.	 He	 wished	 he	 was	 with	 them,	 but	 business	 must	 come	 before
pleasure.
‘I	 have	 already	 made	 some	 important	 decisions.	 First,	 I	 wish	 to	 fit	 all	 my	 officials	 into	 a	 single
hierarchy.	Every	one	of	them,	whether	they	are	soldiers	or	not,	will	be	designated	as	commanders	of	a
certain	number	of	troops.	You	look	startled,	Abul	Fazl,	but	with	such	a	large	and	disparate	empire	I	must
find	ways	to	make	my	rule	uniform	and	consistent.	Even	the	head	of	the	royal	kitchens	will	be	included	–
he	will	become	a	commander	of	six	hundred.	You,	as	my	adviser	and	chronicler,	will	be	a	commander	of
four	thousand.’
Abul	 Fazl	 permitted	 himself	 a	 satisfied	 smile	 and	 bent	 over	 his	 writing	 again	 as	 Akbar	 continued.
‘Next,	certain	lands	within	my	empire	will	be	designated	crown	property	and	my	officials	will	collect	the
due	taxes	and	remit	them	straight	to	my	treasury.	The	rest	of	my	territory	will	be	divided	into	jagirs	–	fiefs
–	and	given	to	my	nobles	and	commanders	to	govern.	They	will	be	responsible	for	gathering	the	taxes	and
may	keep	a	proportion	in	return	for	maintaining	an	agreed	number	of	troops	for	the	crown.	In	that	way,
should	I	need	to	go	to	war	I	will	be	able	to	gather	a	large	and	well-trained	army	quickly.’

‘Y

‘Can	the	holders	bequeath	their	jagirs	to	their	sons,	Majesty?’
‘No.	When	they	die,	the	jagir	will	revert	to	me	to	be	disposed	of	at	my	pleasure.’	Akbar	paused.	‘By
making	every	man	of	importance	a	servant	of	the	empire	and	by	being	able	to	remove	troublemakers	from
their	jagirs	and	confiscate	their	property	when	they	die,	I	can	compel	my	nobles’	loyalty	and	prevent	any
of	them	from	building	a	power	base	against	me.’	He	paused,	and	for	a	few	moments	the	only	sound	was
the	 scratching	 of	 Abul	 Fazl’s	 long,	 ivory-stemmed	 pen.	 ‘Is	 everything	 clear?	 Have	 you	 noted	 down
everything	I	said?’
‘Yes,	Majesty.	I	have	written	accurately	and	in	sufficient	detail	for	all	who	read	my	account	to	benefit
from	 your	 great	 wisdom,	 unparalleled	 insight	 and	 organisational	 genius	 in	 bringing	 order	 to	 your	 new
dominions.’
Why	 did	 Abul	 Fazl	 have	 to	 use	 quite	 so	 many	 words?	 Akbar	 wondered.	 He	 seemed	 to	 think	 that
verbose	 and	 constant	 flattery	 was	 the	 way	 to	 Akbar’s	 favour.	 Perhaps	 it	 was	 the	 Persian	 way,	 though
Bairam	 Khan	 had	 not	 been	 like	 that.	 The	 memory	 of	 his	 old	 mentor	 and	 his	 treatment	 of	 him	 was	 still
painful,	and	Akbar	determinedly	pushed	it	out	of	his	mind.
‘Let	us	go	outside.	We	can	talk	further	there.’	He	led	the	way	from	his	private	apartments	to	a	courtyard
where	his	three	sons	were	playing.	Five-year-old	Salim	was	riding	in	a	small	cart	being	pulled	by	Murad,
just	eleven	months	younger,	and	three-and-a-half-year-old	Daniyal.	They	hadn’t	noticed	him	yet,	standing
with	Abul	Fazl	in	the	shadows	beneath	a	neem	tree,	and	went	on	with	their	game.	Salim	was	growing	fast.
He	had	Hirabai’s	narrow,	slender	build	and	the	same	thick	dark	hair	and	long-lashed	eyes.	Murad	was
nearly	 as	 tall	 but	 thicker	 set,	 more	 like	 Akbar	 himself,	 but	 with	 the	 tawny	 eyes	 of	 his	 Rajput	 mother,	 a
princess	of	Jaisalmer.	Little	Daniyal,	chubby	with	puppy	fat	and	trying	hard	to	keep	up	with	Murad,	as	yet
resembled	neither	Akbar	nor	his	beautiful	Persian	mother.
Akbar	 watched	 with	 the	 satisfaction	 he	 always	 felt	 when	 he	 looked	 at	 them.	 Just	 as	 Shaikh	 Salim
Chishti	had	predicted,	he	had	three	strong	sons.	‘Look	at	them,	Abul	Fazl.	What	more	could	I	have	done	to
secure	the	succession	than	father	three	such	healthy	boys,	and	what	better	foundation	could	I	have	given
my	empire?	God	has	been	good	to	me.’
‘Yes,	indeed,	Majesty.	He	has	poured	his	celestial	light	upon	you.’
The	 cart	 had	 come	 to	 a	 halt	 on	 the	 other	 side	 of	 the	 courtyard	 and	 Murad	 was	 trying	 to	 climb	 in,	 no
doubt	demanding	his	turn.	For	a	moment	the	memory	of	the	Sufi’s	warning	disturbed	Akbar’s	content.	He
must	pay	close	attention	to	the	education	of	his	sons	and	be	alert	for	any	signs	of	rivalry	or	jealousy,	he
thought,	watching	them	intently	now.	But	Salim	was	laughing	as	he	yielded	his	place	in	the	cart	to	Murad
who,	Akbar	could	see,	looked	all	smiles.	They	were	still	so	young	.	.	.	He	was	being	foolish.	It	would	be
years	before	he	need	worry	–	if	he	ever	had	to.	He	was	about	to	walk	over	to	join	them	when	his	qorchi
approached.
‘Majesty,	the	architects	have	arrived	to	discuss	the	plans	for	Sikri.’
‘Excellent.	I	will	come	at	once.	You	too,	Abul	Fazl.	I	want	you	to	know	everything	about	this	project.	I
am	 planning	 a	 new	 capital	 at	 Sikri	 to	 fulfil	 my	 promise	 to	 Shaikh	 Salim	 Chishti,	 the	 Sufi	 priest	 who
predicted	the	birth	of	my	sons.’
‘Your	love	of	architecture	is	well	known,	Majesty.	Your	father’s	tomb	in	Delhi	is	the	finest	building	in
all	Hindustan.’
Abul	Fazl	was	for	once	not	exaggerating,	Akbar	thought	as	they	returned	to	his	apartments.	Humayun’s
octagonal	sandstone	and	marble	mausoleum	was	indeed	magnificent.	With	its	high	double-skinned	dome
and	elegant	symmetry,	it	recalled	Timur’s	tomb	in	far-off	Samarkand	of	which	Akbar	had	seen	drawings.
It	was	fitting	that	his	father	should	rest	in	such	a	place.	Of	course,	he	himself	would	probably	never	visit
blue-domed	 Samarkand	 with	 its	 soaring	 Turquoise	 Gate.	 For	 him	 it	 would	 remain	 like	 a	 dream,	 or	 the

setting	of	some	wonderful	fable	–	spectrally	beautiful	but	unreal.	He	had	been	born	in	Hindustan	–	its	dry
red	soil	was	in	his	veins	and	his	destiny	was	here.	The	thought	reminded	him	of	something	important.
‘You	must	set	this	down	in	the	chronicle,	Abul	Fazl.	Sikri	will	be	entirely	different	from	anything	I	–	or
my	 father	 or	 grandfather	 –	 have	 built	 in	 Hindustan.	 I	 have	 decided	 to	 build	 it	 in	 the	 style	 of	 my	 Hindu
subjects.	 That’s	 why	 I’ve	 chosen	 Hindu	 architects.	 I	 have	 already	 spent	 many	 hours	 questioning	 them.
They	have	ancient	books	to	guide	them	in	which	everything	is	written	–	from	the	best	way	to	make	bricks,
to	siting	buildings	in	such	a	way	as	to	bring	good	fortune	to	those	who	live	in	them.’
The	two	architects	were	waiting	in	Akbar’s	private	audience	chamber.	One	was	tall	and	middle-aged,
the	other	much	younger	and	holding	some	long	rolls	of	papers	in	his	arms.	They	bowed	as	Akbar	entered
but	 he	 waved	 at	 them	 to	 stand	 upright	 and	 addressed	 the	 elder	 of	 the	 two.	 ‘Welcome,	 Tuhin	 Das.	 Let’s
dispense	with	ceremony.	I’m	eager	to	see	what	you	have	to	show	me.	What	are	those	papers	your	son	has
there?’
‘Some	preliminary	drawings,	Majesty.’
‘Spread	them	out	so	I	can	see	them.’
‘Certainly.	Mohan,	do	as	His	Majesty	asks.’
Akbar	waited	as	Tuhin	Das’s	son	–	a	slight,	narrow-visaged	young	man	with	the	red	Hindu	tilak	mark
on	his	forehead	–	laid	out	the	sheets	one	by	one	on	an	ebony	table,	weighting	each	down	at	the	corners
with	a	few	pebbles	which	he	fished	from	a	little	bag	suspended	from	the	belt	round	his	brown	woollen
robe.	His	fingertips	were	stained	with	ink,	and	Akbar	noticed	that	they	were	shaking	a	little	with	nerves.
Even	 before	 Mohan	 had	 finished,	 Akbar	 was	 leaning	 eagerly	 over	 the	 table.	 The	 pieces	 of	 paper	 were
covered	with	a	grid	of	small	squares	on	which	different	buildings	were	marked.
‘Majesty,	may	I	suggest	that	we	begin	with	this	one?’	Tuhin	Das	indicated	the	largest	of	the	drawings.
‘Here	I	have	drawn	the	overall	layout	of	the	imperial	complex.	As	you	have	already	specified,	it	will	be
built	up	on	the	plateau	with	–	as	you	can	see	–	the	main	town	below.	It	would	be	bounded	by	walls	on
three	sides	while	on	the	northwestern	side	would	be	a	great	lake,	not	only	to	protect	Sikri	but	to	supply	it
with	water.’	Akbar	nodded	assent.
‘I	propose	that	the	palaces,	the	mosque	and	all	the	other	buildings	of	the	court	should	be	built	along	the
line	 of	 this	 ridge	 I	 have	 sketched	 here,	 which	 runs	 from	 the	 southwest	 to	 the	 northeast.	 But	 please
remember,	 Majesty,	 though	 we	 have	 tried	 our	 best	 to	 interpret	 your	 wishes	 these	 are	 preliminary	 ideas
only.’
As	 the	 architect	 pointed	 at	 his	 drawing,	 Akbar	 noticed	 that	 he	 had	 lost	 the	 top	 joint	 of	 his	 right
forefinger.	 Tuhin	 Das	 saw	 his	 glance.	 ‘An	 accident,	 Majesty.	 I	 was	 once	 a	 stonemason.	 A	 slab	 I	 was
working	on	slipped	and	crushed	my	finger.	But	it	was	good	fortune	not	bad.	Because	of	it	I	studied	how	to
become	a	designer	of	buildings.’
‘Fate	acts	in	mysterious	ways.	Explain	this	plan	further	to	me.’
‘The	 palace	 complex	 would	 consist	 of	 a	 series	 of	 interconnecting	 courtyards.	 What	 we	 have	 brought
here	today	are	the	plans	for	the	main	court	buildings.	If	you	like	them,	we	can	make	wooden	models	to
give	a	more	detailed	idea	of	their	facades	and	layouts.’
‘What	is	this?’	Akbar	pointed	to	a	drawing	of	a	large	enclosed	area.
‘The	haram	sara	–	large	enough	for	five	hundred	ladies	to	live	in	comfort	with	their	attendants,	just	as
you	requested.	Most	of	them	would	have	apartments	in	this	palace,	the	panch	mahal.’	Tuhin	Das	pointed
to	 a	 sketch	 of	 a	 tall	 building	 five	 floors	 high.	 ‘I	 have	 modelled	 it	 on	 buildings	 I	 saw	 when	 I	 travelled
through	 Persia.	 There	 they	 have	 clever	 ways	 of	 designing	 houses	 and	 palaces	 with	 special	 vents	 and
tunnels	 to	 catch	 and	 channel	 any	 cooling	 breezes,	 and	 I	 have	 done	 the	 same	 here.	 I	 have	 also	 tried	 to
create	a	place	of	beauty	–	see	how	each	floor	is	supported	by	slender	sandstone	columns.	On	the	very	top

we	have	a	hawa	mahal	–	a	palace	of	the	winds	beneath	a	domed	canopy	where	the	ladies	may	sit.’
‘Good,’	 said	 Akbar.	 His	 wives	 and	 concubines	 must	 live	 in	 the	 luxury	 to	 be	 expected	 of	 the	 Moghul
court.	 Among	 the	 growing	 number	 of	 his	 concubines	 he	 still	 visited	 Mayala,	 but	 perhaps	 more	 out	 of
affection	than	desire	after	all	these	years.	Others	roused	greater	physical	passion	now.	A	newly	arrived
Russian	girl	–	the	first	he	had	ever	seen,	sent	as	a	gift	by	a	rich	Moghul	merchant	who	traded	in	far-off
lands	 –	 with	 wide	 sapphire	 eyes,	 pale	 skin	 and	 hair	 the	 colour	 of	 sunlight	 was	 absorbing	 much	 of	 his
attention.
‘Here	are	the	drawings	of	the	houses	for	your	principal	wives	and	for	your	mother	and	aunt,	Majesty.’
Akbar	 ran	 his	 eye	 over	 Tuhin	 Das’s	 sketches	 of	 a	 series	 of	 elegant	 mansions.	 ‘Which	 is	 the	 one	 you
propose	for	the	Empress	Hirabai?’
‘This	 one.	 See,	 it	 has	 a	 chattri	 on	 the	 roof	 where	 she	 can	 go	 to	 observe	 the	 moon	 and	 worship	 our
Hindu	gods,	just	as	you	ordered,	Majesty.’
Akbar	looked	carefully	at	the	drawing.	Though	he	hardly	saw	Hirabai,	he	wished	her	to	be	treated	with
the	honour	due	to	her	rank	as	the	first	of	his	wives	and	the	mother	of	his	eldest	son.
‘Excellent.	And	my	palace?’
‘Adjacent	to	the	haram	 and	 linked	 to	 it	 by	 covered	 walkways	 and	 subterranean	 passages.	 In	 front	 of
your	palace,	set	in	a	great	courtyard,	would	be	the	Anup	Talao	or	Peerless	Pool,	twelve	feet	deep	and	fed
by	 water	 from	 the	 lake	 along	 a	 series	 of	 aqueducts,	 so	 that	 all	 the	 time	 you	 will	 hear	 the	 refreshing
rippling	of	water.’
‘You	are	certain	there	will	be	enough	water	to	supply	the	entire	city?’
‘The	engineers	assure	us	so,	Majesty.’
‘What’s	 this?’	 Akbar	 looked	 in	 puzzlement	 at	 a	 large	 rectangular	 space	 to	 one	 side	 of	 his	 proposed
palace	with	a	strange	design	drawn	upon	it.
‘This	 would	 be	 your	 private	 terrace,	 Majesty,	 but	 instead	 of	 just	 placing	 ordinary	 stone	 slabs	 on	 the
ground,	I	suggest	the	novelty	of	laying	it	out	like	the	cruciform	board	on	which	we	play	the	Hindustani
game	 of	 pachisi.	 It	 is	 a	 little	 like	 the	 game	 of	 chess	 that	 I	 understand	 you	 play,	 Majesty.	 You	 and	 your
courtiers	would	be	able	to	relax	here	and	play,	using	giant	pieces.’
‘Excellent.	You	have	been	very	inventive,	Tuhin	Das.	And	this?’
‘The	diwan-i-khas,	your	hall	of	private	audience.	From	the	outside	it	appears	to	have	two	storeys	but
in	reality	there	is	only	a	single	chamber.	Mohan,	show	His	Majesty	your	drawing	of	the	interior.’
Looking	more	confident	now,	Mohan	undid	the	leather	satchel	hanging	from	his	left	shoulder	and	drew
out	a	small	sheet	of	paper	which	he	unfolded	and	placed	carefully	on	the	table	next	to	the	larger	drawings.
Akbar	 saw	 a	 single	 high-ceilinged	 chamber	 in	 the	 centre	 of	 which	 rose	 an	 elaborately	 carved	 column,
slender	 at	 the	 base	 then	 swelling	 out	 to	 support	 a	 balustraded	 circular	 platform	 connected	 by	 diagonal
bridges	to	the	four	corners	of	the	room.	It	was	beautiful,	but	what	sort	of	room	was	it?
‘I	don’t	understand.	What	is	the	purpose	of	that	platform	so	high	above	the	ground	and	those	narrow
hanging	bridges?’
‘The	 platform	 is	 where	 you	 would	 sit	 on	 your	 throne,	 Majesty,	 while	 giving	 audience.	 The	 bridges
signify	that	you	have	dominion	over	the	four	quarters	of	the	globe.	Any	man	invited	to	address	you	would
advance	along	one	of	the	bridges.	The	rest	of	your	courtiers	would	watch	and	listen	from	the	floor	of	the
chamber.’
Akbar	looked	intently	at	the	drawing.	He	had	expected	Tuhin	Das	to	design	an	audience	chamber	fit	for
an	emperor,	but	he	had	surpassed	himself.	The	more	he	studied	the	design	and	pondered	the	ideas	behind
it,	the	better	he	liked	it.
‘Where	does	this	idea	come	from?	Does	the	Persian	shah	have	something	similar?’

‘No	other	ruler	has	such	a	chamber,	Majesty.	It	was	my	idea.	Does	it	please	you?’
‘Yes,	 I	 think	 it	 does	 .	 .	 .	 But	 this	 central	 column.	 Presumably	 it	 would	 be	 carved	 from	 wood?
Sandalwood	perhaps?’
‘No,	Majesty.	To	be	strong	enough	to	support	the	bridges	we	would	need	to	use	sandstone.’
‘Impossible.	The	design	is	too	intricate.’
‘Forgive	 me	 for	 disagreeing,	 Majesty,	 but	 I	 know	 it	 can	 be	 done.	 The	 craftsmen	 of	 Hindustan	 are	 so
skilled	they	can	carve	sandstone	as	if	it	were	wood	–	no	design	is	too	detailed	for	them.’
‘If	your	craftsmen	can	truly	do	as	you	say,	then	let	the	entire	imperial	complex	–	every	column,	every
balustrade,	every	window	and	doorway	–	be	of	carved	sandstone.	We	will	create	a	rose-red	city	that	will
be	a	wonder	of	the	world	.	.	.’	In	his	mind’s	eye,	Akbar	could	already	see	his	new	capital,	exquisite	as	a
jewellery	box,	as	durable	as	the	stone	of	which	it	would	be	built.	Not	only	would	it	be	a	fitting	tribute	to
Shaikh	Salim	Chishti	but	a	memorial	to	Moghul	greatness.
The	number	of	labourers	working	on	the	construction	of	Sikri	was,	according	to	Tuhin	Das	whom	Akbar
had	appointed	as	superintendent	of	construction,	already	over	thirty	thousand	and	still	growing.	Every	day
beneath	the	burning	sun,	a	long	line	of	men	and	some	women	toiled	up	and	down	the	specially	constructed
road	of	packed	earth	leading	to	the	plateau,	carrying	equipment	up	to	the	summit	and	bearing	away	rubble
and	debris	in	baskets	balanced	on	their	heads.	From	a	distance	they	resembled	lines	of	ants,	moving	with
ceaseless	 patience	 and	 industry	 from	 the	 first	 pale	 light	 of	 dawn	 to	 the	 crimsoning	 sunset.	 They	 were
scantily	clad	–	the	men	in	grimy	dhotis	and	loincloths	and	the	women	in	cotton	saris,	sometimes	with	an
infant	 tied	 to	 their	 back.	 The	 camp	 where	 they	 slept	 on	 woven	 mats	 beneath	 awnings	 of	 dun-coloured
sacking	and	cooked	their	meals	of	lentils,	vegetables	and	flat	bread	over	dung	fires	stretched	away	across
the	dusty	plain,	almost	indistinguishable	from	it.
It	was	an	army	of	quite	a	different	sort	from	any	he	had	ever	commanded,	Akbar	thought	as	he	rode	on
one	 of	 his	 frequent	 tours	 of	 inspection	 with	 Tuhin	 Das,	 who	 was	 looking	 around	 him	 with	 satisfaction.
‘See,	Majesty,	how	much	progress	has	already	been	made	with	levelling	the	land	ready	for	the	building	to
start.	Soon	we	will	be	able	to	dig	the	first	foundations.’
‘And	the	quarrying	of	the	sandstone?’
‘Two	thousand	rough	slabs	have	already	been	cut	and	next	week	we	will	begin	transporting	them	here
by	bullock	cart	so	that	the	carvers	may	begin	their	work.’
‘I’ve	an	idea	that	might	make	the	work	proceed	even	faster.	We	have	detailed	designs	for	everything,	so
why	not	have	the	main	pieces	carved	at	the	quarry,	building	by	building,	and	then,	when	they	are	ready,
brought	to	Sikri	to	be	fitted	into	place?’
‘An	excellent	thought,	Majesty.	That	should	indeed	make	the	buildings	quicker	to	assemble	and	lessen
the	clamour	and	congestion	on	the	construction	site	itself.’
‘I	want	every	worker	well	paid	for	their	labour.	Announce	that	I	am	doubling	the	daily	wage	and	that,	if
progress	continues	at	a	good	pace,	once	a	week	there	will	be	a	free	distribution	of	corn	from	the	imperial
granaries.	I	wish	them	to	go	at	their	work	with	unflagging	vigour,	and	I	also	intend	to	set	an	example.’
‘How	so,	Majesty?’
‘Take	me	to	the	quarries.	I	intend	to	cut	stone	alongside	my	subjects	to	show	them	their	emperor	does
not	flinch	from	hard	manual	labour	.	.	.’
Two	hours	later,	sweat	running	down	his	naked	torso	and	a	frown	of	concentration	on	his	face,	Akbar
swung	his	pickaxe.	Just	as	when	he	flung	a	battleaxe	or	a	spear,	his	aim	was	good.	The	sharp	tip	found	its
mark	again	and	again,	biting	into	the	line	drawn	with	charcoal	across	the	slab	and	creating	a	furrow	into

which	 the	 skilled	 stonemasons	 would	 then	 be	 able	 to	 hammer	 their	 chisels	 to	 cut	 a	 clean	 edge.	 It	 was
exhausting	work	–	tomorrow	his	muscles	would	be	as	tight	and	stiff	as	after	a	hard-fought	battle	–	but	he
had	 seldom	 felt	 happier.	 Destiny	 intended	 great	 things	 for	 him,	 but	 for	 once	 it	 was	 good	 just	 to	 be	 an
ordinary	man,	glorying	in	his	youth	and	strength	and	with	no	worry	for	the	future.

Chapter	11

The	Pewter	Sea

ajesty,	 by	 the	 time	 you	 return	 from	 your	 campaign	 in	 Gujarat	 the	 city	 walls	 will	 be	 nearing
completion,’	Tuhin	Das	told	Akbar	as,	together	with	Abul	Fazl,	they	rode	around	the	walls	of	Sikri
–	which	currently	stood	only	six	feet	high	–	to	inspect	the	progress	of	construction.
‘Take	 care	 what	 you	 promise,’	 Akbar	 responded.	 ‘I	 intend	 my	 campaign	 to	 be	 a	 short	 one.	 I	 have
learned	much	from	Ahmed	Khan	and	others	who	accompanied	my	father	on	his	conquest	of	Gujarat	nearly
forty	years	ago.	It	was	only	because	of	Sher	Shah	that	we	were	forced	to	relinquish	the	territory.	This	time
I	intend	that	Gujarat	will	remain	Moghul	for	ever.’
‘The	 holy	 pilgrims	 who	 cross	 from	 Cambay	 and	 Surat	 to	 Arabia	 will	 shower	 great	 praise	 on	 Your
Majesty	if	they	can	travel	in	safety.	The	lawlessness	that	attends	the	rivalries	in	the	Gujarati	royal	family
has	 made	 life	 difficult	 for	 travellers,	 whether	 their	 purpose	 be	 spiritual	 or	 worldly,’	 Abul	 Fazl’s
mellifluous	 voice	 broke	 in.	 ‘Once	 Gujarat	 rests	 in	 Moghul	 hands	 again,	 I	 am	 sure	 that	 port	 taxes	 will
provide	a	bountiful	source	of	revenue.’
‘You	are	right,	Abul	Fazl.	Gujarat	is	still	a	rich	state.	I	intend	to	bring	back	much	wealth	and	booty	to
assist	in	your	ornamentation	of	Sikri,	Tuhin	Das.’
‘Thank	you,	Majesty,	and	may	good	fortune	accompany	you	on	your	campaign,’	Tuhin	Das	replied.
‘I	trust	so	too,	but	I	hope	I	have	left	little	to	providence	in	my	preparations.’
With	that	Akbar	turned,	leaving	Tuhin	Das	and	Abul	Fazl	to	decide	what	to	record	in	the	chronicle,	and
rode	down	towards	the	wide	plain	where	his	army	was	encamped	beneath	the	ridge	on	which	his	new	city
was	 rising.	 As	 he	 approached,	 he	 could	 see	 puffs	 of	 smoke	 emerging	 from	 the	 long	 weapons	 of	 his
musketmen	as	their	officers	drilled	them	to	fire	in	mass	volleys	for	maximum	effect.	Off	to	one	side	his
artillerymen	 were	 toiling	 in	 the	 hot	 sun	 under	 the	 watchful	 eye	 of	 the	 Tajik	 officer	 Ali	 Gul,	 training	 to
speed	up	their	firing	and	reloading	of	the	large	new	bronze	cannon	and	siege	mortars	Akbar	had	ordered
to	 be	 produced	 in	 his	 foundries.	 Always	 eager	 for	 any	 advantage	 from	 new	 innovations,	 he	 had
experimented	with	a	mortar	so	large	and	heavy	that	Ahmed	Khan	had	told	him	it	would	require	a	team	of	a
thousand	oxen	to	move	it.	Even	though	Akbar	knew	that	to	be	an	exaggeration,	he	had	decided	not	to	take
the	 monster	 weapon	 with	 him	 to	 Gujarat.	 If	 all	 went	 well	 –	 and	 he	 must	 make	 sure	 it	 did	 –	 any	 siege
would	be	over	long	before	it	arrived	and	could	be	brought	into	action.
Directly	 in	 front	 of	 him	 Akbar	 saw	 Ahmed	 Khan	 and	 the	 bulkier	 figure	 of	 Muhammad	 Beg	 deep	 in
conversation	 beside	 one	 of	 their	 command	 tents.	 As	 the	 two	 men	 talked,	 Ahmed	 Khan	 was	 as	 usual
twisting	 the	 hair	 of	 his	 thin	 beard,	 now	 mostly	 silver,	 while	 the	 equally	 grizzled	 Muhammad	 Beg	 was
waving	his	hand	excitedly.	Seeing	Akbar	ride	up,	the	two	veterans	bowed.
‘What	are	you	two	arguing	about?’
‘When	we	will	have	enough	supplies	to	begin	the	campaign,’	said	Ahmed	Khan.
‘I	 was	 proposing	 a	 month’s	 delay,	 Majesty,’	 said	 Muhammad	 Beg,	 ‘until	 we	 can	 be	 sure	 we	 have
enough	grain.’
‘In	turn,	Majesty,	I	was	arguing	that	if	we	ride	fast	and	light,	as	you	intend,	our	requirements	will	be

‘M

less.	 In	 any	 case,	 since	 we’ve	 already	 had	 promises	 of	 help	 from	 dissatisfied	 members	 of	 the	 divided
Gujarati	royal	family,	like	Mirza	Muqim,	surely	they	can	be	counted	on	for	some	supplies.	Besides,	if	the
worst	came	to	the	worst	we	could	live	off	the	land.’
‘I’m	with	you,	Ahmed	Khan,’	said	Akbar.	‘Prince	Muqim’s	call	for	me	to	intervene	has	already	added
legitimacy	to	our	invasion	–	even	if	my	father’s	previous	conquest	of	Gujarat	wasn’t	sufficient	reason	in
itself	–	and	I’m	prepared	to	plan	on	his	providing	provisions	and	indeed	troops.	On	that	assumption	when
is	the	earliest	we	can	move	out?’
‘In	a	week’s	time,	Majesty,’	Muhammad	Beg	admitted.
‘So	be	it,	then.’
‘Majesty,	 do	 you	 see	 that	 cloud	 of	 dust	 on	 the	 horizon?	 It	 must	 be	 a	 large	 body	 of	 men	 on	 the	 move,’
Ahmed	Khan	called	as	he	rode	with	Akbar	at	the	head	of	an	advance	detachment	of	his	army	through	the
ripening	cornfields	not	far	from	the	Gujarati	city	of	Ahmedabad.
Akbar	shaded	his	eyes	with	his	gauntleted	hand	and	stared	at	the	billowing	dust.	It	could	only	be	the
forces	of	Itimad	Khan,	self-styled	Shah	of	Gujarat.	It	seemed	Mirza	Muqim	had	been	right	when	at	their
rendezvous	he	had	suggested	that	if	Akbar	rode	hard	he	could	intercept	the	shah	near	Ahmedabad	as	he	set
out	to	confront	the	Moghul	forces.	‘It’s	Itimad	Khan’s	men,	I’m	sure	of	it.	If	so,	just	as	Mirza	Muqim	said,
we	have	the	advantage	of	surprise	.	.	.’
‘We’ll	 soon	 find	 out,	 Majesty.	 Shall	 I	 give	 the	 order	 to	 draw	 weapons	 and	 deploy	 into	 battle
formation?’
‘Of	course.’
Minutes	 later	 Akbar	 was	 galloping	 on	 his	 black	 stallion	 at	 the	 head	 of	 a	 tight	 phalanx	 of	 his	 men
towards	the	dust	cloud,	flattening	the	golden	corn	as	they	rode.	He	had	his	domed	helmet	with	the	peacock
feather	at	its	crest	on	his	head,	gilded	breastplate	on	his	chest	and	his	sword	Alamgir	in	his	hand.	Just
behind	him	rode	two	of	his	qorchis,	holding	great	green	Moghul	banners	which	streamed	out	behind	them.
With	each	stride	of	his	horse	the	shapes	of	the	Gujarati	horsemen	in	the	dust	cloud	became	more	distinct.
It	 was	 clear	 to	 Akbar	 that	 they	 had	 recognised	 that	 it	 was	 his	 forces	 that	 were	 approaching	 and	 had
decided	to	meet	them	head	on	rather	than	retreat	to	the	protection	of	the	walls	of	Ahmedabad.
‘How	many	of	them	do	you	think	there	are,	Ahmed	Khan?’	shouted	Akbar	over	the	drumming	of	their
horses’	hooves.
‘It’s	difficult	to	say.	Perhaps	five	thousand,	Majesty.’
‘They	must	think	they	outnumber	us	sufficiently	to	be	sure	of	victory,	but	we	know	better,	don’t	we?’
The	 two	 columns	 were	 now	 less	 than	 a	 thousand	 yards	 apart	 and	 closing	 fast.	 At	 a	 command	 from
Akbar	his	mounted	archers	stood	in	their	stirrups	and	loosed	a	volley	of	arrows	towards	the	Gujaratis.	As
they	 flew	 through	 the	 air	 they	 met	 an	 answering	 storm	 of	 Gujarati	 shafts.	 Ahead	 of	 him,	 Akbar	 saw	 the
horse	of	one	of	the	leading	Gujaratis	crash	to	the	ground,	two	arrows	protruding	from	its	neck.	As	it	fell,
it	catapulted	its	rider	head	over	heels	into	the	waving	corn.	Simultaneously	another	rider	slipped	from	his
saddle	with	an	arrow	in	his	cheek.	Behind	him	Akbar	heard	a	crash	and	an	agonised	shout.	At	least	one	of
his	own	men	had	been	hit.	However,	Akbar	had	no	time	to	look	round	as	the	two	lines	of	mounted	men
smashed	into	each	other	at	speed.	At	the	last	moment	one	of	the	Gujaratis	–	seemingly	having	recognised
Akbar	by	his	gilded	breastplate	–	swerved	his	chestnut	into	the	path	of	Akbar’s	black	stallion	in	a	selfsacrificing	attempt	to	unhorse	him.
Akbar	reacted	quickly.	Pulling	hard	on	the	reins	he	managed	to	turn	his	mount	sufficiently	to	lessen	the
impact,	 but	 his	 horse’s	 shoulder	 still	 caught	 the	 chestnut	 in	 the	 flank,	 knocking	 it	 over	 and	 sending	 its

brave	rider	flying.	Snorting	with	pain	from	the	impact,	the	stallion	reared	up	and	Akbar	leaned	forward	on
its	 neck	 while	 gripping	 as	 hard	 as	 he	 could	 with	 his	 knees,	 struggling	 to	 remain	 aboard.	 He	 almost
succeeded,	 but	 as	 his	 horse	 dropped	 its	 forelegs	 back	 to	 the	 ground	 it	 skittered	 sideways	 and	 became
entangled	in	one	of	the	green	Moghul	banners	which	had	fallen	from	the	dying	hands	of	one	of	Akbar’s
qorchis	who	lay	in	the	corn,	transfixed	by	a	Gujarati	spear.	This	time	Akbar,	who	had	lost	a	stirrup	in	the
previous	struggle,	could	not	retain	his	seat	and	slid	from	the	saddle,	but	still	managed	to	hang	on	to	his
stallion’s	reins	with	his	left	hand.
Within	moments	another	Gujarati	swerved	towards	him,	aiming	to	run	him	through	like	his	qorchi.	 At
last	 dropping	 the	 reins,	 Akbar	 jumped	 aside,	 just	 avoiding	 the	 rider’s	 lance	 and	 the	 hooves	 of	 his
onrushing	horse.	As	he	leapt	away,	Akbar	gave	a	great	backhand	slash	with	Alamgir.	Despite	the	firmness
of	his	grip	he	felt	the	sword	judder	in	his	gauntleted	hand	as	it	struck	his	opponent’s	mount	in	the	flank
before	crunching	into	the	bone	and	sinew	of	the	rider’s	knee,	precipitating	him	too	from	his	saddle.	For	a
moment	the	Gujarati	attempted	to	stand,	but	his	damaged	knee	would	take	no	weight	and	as	it	gave	way	he
collapsed	 again	 into	 the	 flattened	 corn	 beneath	 the	 hooves	 of	 one	 of	 Akbar’s	 advancing	 cavalrymen’s
horses	which	shattered	his	skull.
The	 Moghuls’	 initial	 charge	 had	 pushed	 the	 Gujaratis	 back	 and	 Akbar’s	 bodyguard	 were	 now
surrounding	him.	His	winded	stallion	was	only	a	few	yards	off.	Sheathing	Alamgir	and	grabbing	the	shaft
of	the	fallen	Moghul	banner,	he	ran	to	the	horse	and	pulled	himself	back	into	the	saddle.	‘Forward,	men.
We	must	exploit	the	advantage,’	he	yelled.	The	black	stallion	responded	to	his	urging	and	with	the	Moghul
banner	flying	behind	him	Akbar	once	again	charged	into	the	mass	of	Gujarati	horsemen.	Gripping	the	reins
in	his	teeth	he	slashed	with	Alamgir	at	a	burly	rider	but	saw	the	sword	glance	off	the	enemy’s	breastplate.
His	next	stroke	cut	deep	into	the	flesh	of	another	Gujarati’s	upper	arm	and	then	he	found	himself	on	the
other	side	of	mêlée,	soon	to	be	joined	once	more	by	most	of	his	bodyguard.
Handing	the	green	banner	to	one	of	them,	Akbar	looked	round	as	he	caught	his	breath.	The	fighting	was
still	intense,	particularly	near	one	of	the	Gujaratis’	red	flags	about	two	hundred	yards	to	his	left.	Hastily
wiping	away	the	sweat	that	was	dripping	into	his	eyes,	he	kicked	his	horse	towards	it.	As	he	did	so	he
suddenly	saw	an	unhorsed,	red-turbaned	Gujarati	stagger	up	from	a	patch	of	untrampled	corn.	He	had	a
long	dagger	in	his	hand	and	pulling	his	arm	back	sent	it	spinning	towards	Akbar.	His	aim	was	good	but
Akbar	ducked	low	over	his	horse’s	neck	just	in	time	and	the	tip	of	the	dagger	caught	his	helmet	a	glancing
blow	before	falling	harmlessly	to	the	ground.	Leaving	others	to	deal	with	his	assailant,	Akbar	urged	his
black	stallion	onwards.	Soon	he	was	pushing	into	the	turmoil	around	the	red	banner,	striking	vigorously	to
left	and	right	as	he	did	so.
A	tall	Gujarati	mounted	on	a	brown	mare	charged	towards	him,	lance	extended	in	front	of	him.	Seeing
him	only	at	the	last	moment,	Akbar	deflected	the	lance	with	his	sword,	knocking	it	up	into	the	air.	Pulling
hard	 on	 his	 reins	 the	 Gujarati	 wheeled	 his	 horse	 to	 attack	 once	 more,	 but	 this	 time	 Akbar	 was	 ready.
Swerving	across	the	rider’s	charge,	he	plunged	his	sword	deep	into	the	tall	man’s	left	side,	toppling	him
from	the	saddle	to	sprawl	in	the	dust.
Breathing	hard,	Akbar	reined	in	and	saw	that	under	the	onslaught	of	the	superior	Moghul	numbers	he
had	 led	 into	 the	 battle	 the	 Gujaratis	 were	 beginning	 to	 give	 way,	 slowly	 at	 first	 but	 then	 in	 increasing
desperation,	turning	their	horses’	heads	and	attempting	to	escape	back	towards	the	safety	of	the	walls	of
Ahmedabad.	Akbar	set	off	in	pursuit	of	a	group	of	fleeing	opponents	but	at	first	his	winded	and	blowing
stallion	seemed	unable	to	gain	on	them.	Then	one	of	the	Gujaratis’	horses	slipped	in	the	mud	on	landing
after	jumping	one	of	the	small	irrigation	ditches	that	criss-crossed	the	cornfields.	Another	stumbled	over
it,	and	then	another,	and	another.	As	a	rider	struggled	to	his	feet	to	defend	himself,	the	sword	of	one	of
Akbar’s	bodyguards	caught	him	in	the	throat	and	he	fell	backwards	into	the	ditch,	red	blood	flowing	from

his	 wound	 into	 the	 green	 water	 over	 which	 mosquitoes	 were	 buzzing.	 Akbar	 himself	 closed	 in	 on	 a
Gujarati	 who	 like	 several	 others	 had	 slowed	 down	 and	 was	 turning	 back	 to	 try	 to	 rescue	 his	 unhorsed
comrades.
‘The	battle	is	over.	Save	your	lives.	You	are	surrounded	by	my	bodyguard,	and	there	is	no	shame	in
surrender	 having	 fought	 so	 well,’	 shouted	 Akbar.	 After	 a	 moment’s	 hesitation,	 during	 which	 he	 glanced
round	at	his	remaining	companions,	the	Gujarati,	who	had	blood	oozing	from	a	wound	to	his	cheek,	threw
down	his	weapon.	His	companions	began	to	do	likewise.
As	the	Moghuls	were	tying	up	their	prisoners,	Akbar	saw	Muhammad	Beg	approaching	with	some	of
his	 troops.	 One	 of	 them	 held	 the	 reins	 of	 a	 grey	 horse	 on	 which	 sat	 a	 slim	 young	 man	 wearing	 a	 rubyencrusted	breastplate	over	white	robes.	‘This	is	Itimad	Khan,	Majesty.	We	found	him	hiding	in	the	corn
near	his	dead	horse.	His	bodyguard	had	deserted	him.’
‘Are	you	indeed	Itimad	Khan?’	asked	Akbar.
‘I	am	and	I	submit	myself	to	your	mercy,’	the	man	answered	quietly,	keeping	his	eyes	on	the	ground.
‘Are	 you	 prepared	 to	 order	 your	 armies	 to	 cease	 fighting	 and	 to	 surrender	 Ahmedabad	 and	 all	 other
parts	of	Gujarat	under	your	control	to	me?	If	so,	I	will	spare	your	life	and	those	of	your	men	and	allow
you	to	retire	to	a	small	estate	in	a	part	of	the	country	of	your	choosing.’
Relief	flooded	across	Itimad	Khan’s	smooth	face,	which	scarcely	seemed	to	have	known	a	razor.
‘I	will	do	so	willingly.	If	you	release	some	of	these	prisoners	they	can	act	as	my	messengers.’
Akbar	nodded	and	some	of	his	men	moved	towards	the	captives,	but	before	they	could	untie	them	and
bring	them	to	their	leader	to	receive	his	instructions	he	spoke	again.	‘Majesty,	you	must	understand	that	I
do	 not	 command	 the	 coast	 and	 the	 hinterlands	 of	 the	 ports	 of	 Cambay	 and	 Surat.	 My	 rebellious	 cousin
Ibrahim	Hussain	holds	sway	over	them.’	Itimad	Khan	paused,	then	continued	in	a	low	voice,	‘Also,	if	I
speak	the	truth	I	fear	that	not	all	my	own	commanders	will	obey	my	instructions	to	lay	down	their	arms.’
‘I	 know	 of	 the	 situation	 on	 the	 coast	 and	 will	 soon	 take	 my	 army	 there	 to	 force	 Ibrahim	 Hussain	 to
accept	my	rule.	As	for	your	commanders,	they	will	do	well	to	heed	your	orders.	Tell	them	from	me	that
they	will	have	only	one	chance	to	surrender.	If	they	do	not	grasp	it	they	will	die.’
Itimad	 Khan	 nodded,	 soft	 brown	 eyes	 downcast	 once	 more.	 Akbar	 turned	 away,	 contempt	 for	 the
other’s	 weakness	 mingling	 with	 pity	 for	 his	 situation.	 He	 knew	 he	 himself	 had	 the	 strength	 of	 character
never	to	allow	himself	to	be	placed	in	such	a	humiliating	position,	and	he	gave	thanks	for	it.	When	his
sons	 and	 then	 their	 sons	 read	 of	 his	 battles	 in	 Abul	 Fazl’s	 court	 chronicles	 they	 would	 see	 no	 such
shaming	weaknesses	or	failures	but	rejoice	in	his	victories	and	power,	as	he	did	now.
The	ocean	was	calm,	lapping	gently	on	the	pale	tangerine	sands.	Soft	northerly	winds	were	rippling	the
leaves	of	the	tall	palm	trees	fringing	the	beach.	However,	Akbar	could	see	that	about	a	mile	and	a	quarter
further	 along	 the	 shore	 the	 forces	 of	 Ibrahim	 Hussain	 were	 massing	 in	 and	 around	 a	 small	 fort	 set	 on	 a
promontory	and	designed	to	protect	the	land	and	sea	approaches	to	Cambay,	itself	another	two	or	three
miles	up	the	coast.	A	number	of	ships	were	riding	at	anchor	near	the	promontory.	Akbar	turned	to	Ahmed
Khan.	‘You	were	at	Cambay	with	my	father.	What	are	those	vessels?’
‘Most	are	the	dhows	of	the	Arabs	who	transport	the	pilgrims	to	Arabia	for	the	haj	and	at	other	times
trade	in	spices	and	cloth.	These	I	have	seen	often	during	my	previous	time	in	Cambay.	However,	I	have
seen	nothing	before	like	those	three	dark,	squarer,	higher-sided	ships	with	two	masts	which	are	nearer	to
us.’
‘Is	that	the	barrel	of	a	cannon	protruding	over	the	stern	of	one?’
‘I	can’t	be	sure,	Majesty.’

As	Ahmed	Khan	spoke,	sailors	on	the	closest	of	the	three	ships	began	to	unfurl	one	of	its	sails.	As	it
dropped	 from	 the	 yardarm,	 Akbar	 saw	 that	 it	 had	 a	 large	 red	 cross	 painted	 on	 it.	 Other	 sailors	 were
clambering	 into	 a	 rowing	 boat	 that	 had	 been	 lowered	 from	 the	 vessel	 and	 remained	 attached	 to	 it	 by	 a
rope.	Soon,	with	the	help	of	the	sailors	rowing	the	small	boat	and	the	sail	they	had	rigged	on	the	main
ship,	the	vessel	was	moving	slowly	down	the	coast	towards	Akbar’s	position.
In	the	six	weeks	since	his	defeat	of	Itimad	Khan,	Akbar	had	ridden	hard	and	fast	to	the	ocean.	Leaving
all	his	heavy	equipment	behind,	he	had	defeated	and	scattered	the	forces	of	Ibrahim	Hussain	wherever	he
encountered	 them.	 The	 previous	 day	 Akbar’s	 men	 had	 overwhelmed	 another	 small,	 half-derelict	 fort	 a
few	 miles	 further	 south	 along	 the	 coast.	 Watching	 the	 approaching	 ship,	 Akbar	 was	 pleased	 that	 he	 had
ordered	 draught	 oxen	 to	 be	 purchased	 from	 the	 peasants	 in	 the	 surrounding	 villages	 and	 the	 five	 small
ancient	cannon	he	had	found	inside	the	captured	fort	to	be	brought	along	in	case	they	were	of	any	use	in
the	attack	on	Cambay.
‘Deploy	the	cannon	so	that	they	can	fire	on	that	ship	if	need	be.	Have	the	musketeers	prime	and	load
their	weapons,’	he	ordered.	Half	an	hour	later,	when	the	dark	ship	with	the	red	cross	on	its	sail	was	more
or	less	opposite	Akbar’s	army	and	only	a	quarter	of	a	mile	offshore,	it	anchored	again.	A	tall	man	in	a
shining	breastplate	climbed	down	a	rope	ladder	into	the	rowing	boat	which	had	been	helping	to	pull	the
ship	 along,	 followed	 by	 a	 white-turbaned	 figure	 in	 flowing	 lilac	 robes.	 When	 both	 men	 had	 seated
themselves	 in	 the	 stern,	 the	 sailors	 cast	 off	 the	 rope	 attaching	 the	 boat	 to	 the	 bigger	 vessel	 and	 began
rowing	strongly	for	the	shore.	As	soon	as	the	boat	reached	the	shallows,	the	tall	man	and	his	lilac-clad
companion	 climbed	 over	 the	 side	 and	 splashed	 their	 way	 out	 of	 the	 water	 up	 the	 beach.	 Both	 had	 their
arms	outstretched,	presumably	to	show	they	were	unarmed.
Akbar	looked	on,	intrigued.	What	was	their	purpose	in	approaching	him	at	a	time	when	they	must	know
battle	 was	 imminent?	 ‘Search	 them	 for	 weapons	 and	 bring	 them	 to	 me,’	 he	 instructed	 the	 captain	 of	 his
bodyguard.	 The	 captain	 ran	 quickly	 over	 to	 the	 two	 men,	 who	 allowed	 themselves	 to	 be	 searched.
Satisfied	 that	 they	 were	 indeed	 unarmed	 the	 captain	 led	 them	 towards	 Akbar.	 As	 they	 came	 closer	 he
could	see	that	the	man	in	lilac	looked	like	a	Gujarati	but	the	other	was	paler	and	his	eyes	were	dark	and
round.	 His	 long	 nose	 jutted	 over	 a	 full	 mouth	 and	 a	 thick	 and	 curly	 brown	 beard.	 His	 plain	 steel
breastplate	covered	his	chest,	but	on	his	lower	body	he	wore	some	kind	of	baggy	pantaloons	striped	in
black	 and	 gold	 which	 ended	 just	 above	 the	 knee.	 He	 was	 wearing	 red	 stockings	 and	 on	 his	 feet	 calflength,	salt-marked	black	boots	of	a	design	Akbar	had	never	seen	before.
‘Who	are	you?’	he	asked	as	the	two	men	bowed	low	before	him.
‘I	 am	 Saiyid	 Muhammad,	 originally	 from	 Gujarat,’	 replied	 the	 man	 in	 lilac,	 ‘and	 this	 is	 Don	 Ignacio
Lopez,	 the	 Portuguese	 commander	 of	 those	 three	 large	 ships	 you	 see	 in	 the	 bay,	 whom	 I	 serve	 as
translator.’
So	the	brown-bearded	man	was	Portuguese	–	one	of	the	travellers	from	far-off	Europe	who	had	arrived
some	 years	 ago	 to	 found	 a	 trading	 post	 at	 Goa,	 a	 thousand	 miles	 further	 south	 down	 the	 coast,	 thought
Akbar	 as	 he	 carefully	 appraised	 the	 newcomer.	 He	 had	 heard	 of	 the	 Portuguese,	 of	 course.	 They	 were
acquiring	a	reputation	for	the	supply	of	weapons	of	all	sorts,	and	also	for	the	fighting	ability	of	their	ships
and	sailors,	but	this	was	the	first	time	he	had	encountered	them.
‘What	do	you	want?’	he	asked.
The	interpreter	spoke	briefly	to	the	Portuguese	in	a	tongue	Akbar	had	never	heard	before,	and	listened
to	his	reply.	Then	he	bowed	again	to	Akbar.	‘Don	Ignacio	acknowledges	you	on	behalf	of	his	own	king	as
a	great	general	and	mighty	emperor	of	whose	brave	deeds	he	has	heard	much.	Even	though	his	three	ships
out	there	in	the	bay	are	powerful	and	equipped	with	many	cannons,	and	despite	Ibrahim	Hussain’s	offer	of
chests	 full	 of	 jewels	 and	 gold	 if	 he	 would	 aid	 him	 against	 you,	 my	 master	 wishes	 to	 assure	 you	 of	 his

neutrality	in	the	battle	that	looms	between	you	and	Ibrahim	Hussain.’
‘I	am	glad	to	hear	it.	Is	there	any	favour	he	requests	in	return?’
After	another	consultation,	the	translator	said,	‘The	ability	to	trade	through	Cambay,	once	it	is	yours.’
‘When	the	port	is	mine,	he	should	approach	me	again	and	expect	a	favourable	answer.	Now	you	must
depart.	I	can	delay	my	attack	on	Ibrahim	Hussain	no	longer.’
The	two	men	bowed,	turned	and	retraced	their	footsteps	back	down	the	beach	and	through	the	shallows
before	clambering	back	into	the	rowing	boat.	There	were	many	questions	Akbar	would	have	liked	to	ask
them	but	now	was	the	time	for	action	not	reflection	and	he	turned	to	Ahmed	Khan.	‘Order	the	attack.	We
will	ride	along	the	beach	near	the	tree	line	where	the	sand	is	firmer.	Ibrahim	Hussain	and	his	men	will	be
apprehensive,	 knowing	 their	 approach	 to	 the	 Portuguese	 for	 help	 has	 been	 rebuffed	 and	 that	 we	 have
consistently	defeated	their	forces	and	now	outnumber	them.’
Half	 an	 hour	 later,	 Akbar	 was	 thundering	 along	 the	 beach,	 sand	 flying	 from	 the	 hooves	 of	 his	 black
stallion.	 Around	 him	 were	 his	 bodyguard,	 four	 of	 them	 holding	 green	 Moghul	 banners,	 two	 others
sounding	brass	trumpets.	As	they	neared	Ibrahim	Hussain’s	defences,	Akbar	could	see	that	these	consisted
mainly	 of	 makeshift	 trenches	 and	 barricades,	 swiftly	 dug	 from	 the	 surrounding	 sandy	 ground.	 The	 brick
walls	 of	 the	 fort	 behind	 them	 were	 low	 and	 crumbling.	 However,	 Ibrahim	 Hussain	 clearly	 had	 some
cannon,	for	Akbar	saw	orange	flashes	and	then	white	smoke	billowing	from	a	two-storey	building	inside
the	fort.	The	first	shot	decapitated	one	of	his	trumpeters,	sending	his	head	rolling	along	the	sand	until	it
came	to	rest	a	few	feet	from	where	his	instrument	had	fallen.
Other	 riders	 fell	 too,	 hit	 by	 arrows	 and	 musket	 balls,	 but	 Ibrahim	 Hussain’s	 men	 were	 slow	 in
reloading	their	cannon	and	Akbar	was	already	jumping	his	stallion	over	the	first	barricade	and	across	one
of	 the	 trenches	 while	 they	 were	 still	 ramming	 the	 next	 round	 of	 cannon	 balls	 down	 the	 barrels.	 As	 his
stallion	leapt	the	trench	Akbar	slashed	down	at	one	of	the	Gujaratis	hiding	within,	who	was	pulling	back
the	taut	string	of	his	double	bow	ready	to	fire.	Akbar’s	sword	caught	the	archer	full	across	the	mouth	and
he	subsided,	teeth	exposed	and	face	covered	in	blood.
Akbar	 heard	 another	 cannon	 shot	 and	 was	 showered	 with	 gritty	 sand	 as	 the	 ball	 hit	 the	 barricade	 in
front	of	him.	The	Gujarati	artillerymen	had	tried	to	depress	the	barrels	of	their	weapons	to	fire	on	their
advancing	 enemy	 but	 had	 only	 succeeded	 in	 destroying	 their	 own	 defences.	 Pulling	 hard	 on	 his	 horse’s
reins,	Akbar	was	through	the	new	gap	in	the	barricade	and	past	the	dismembered	bodies	of	two	Gujarati
musketeers	that	lay	bleeding	into	the	sand.
Glancing	sideways,	he	saw	that	other	detachments	of	his	horsemen	had	likewise	got	into	the	defences.
He	 urged	 his	 stallion	 forward	 to	 where	 a	 band	 of	 Moghul	 soldiers	 had	 already	 dismounted	 and	 were
attempting	 to	 climb	 over	 the	 crumbling	 brick	 wall	 into	 the	 fort	 itself.	 As	 he	 approached,	 some	 of	 them
succeeded	in	pushing	over	the	top	section	of	a	stretch	of	the	wall	and	scrambling	through.	Akbar	jumped
from	his	horse	and	followed,	grazing	his	left	hand	on	a	piece	of	metal	inserted	in	the	wall	for	support	as
he	 pulled	 himself	 over.	 He	 ran,	 legs	 pumping,	 as	 hard	 as	 he	 could	 after	 his	 men	 who	 were	 dashing
towards	 the	 two-storey	 strongpoint	 which	 he	 could	 now	 see	 was	 the	 only	 building	 within	 the
fortifications.
Another	burst	of	flame.	At	least	one	cannon	remained	in	action	in	the	building.	One	of	his	men	fell	but
then	staggered	up	again,	clearly	having	tripped	rather	than	been	hit.	Breathing	hard,	Akbar	was	by	now
right	 on	 the	 heels	 of	 the	 foremost	 of	 his	 soldiers	 and	 together	 they	 ran	 into	 the	 strongpoint	 through	 a
doorway	left	open	by	the	fleeing	gunners.	Struggling	to	adjust	their	eyes	to	the	darkness	inside,	they	made
out	a	steep	stone	staircase	in	one	corner	and	charged	up	it.	At	the	top,	a	single	Gujarati	officer,	made	of
stronger	 stuff	 than	 his	 comrades,	 was	 desperately	 trying	 to	 lift	 a	 cannon	 ball	 and	 roll	 it	 down	 into	 the
barrel	of	a	small	bronze	cannon.	Hit	in	the	back	by	a	foot-long	dagger	thrown	by	one	of	Akbar’s	men	the

officer	collapsed	over	the	wooden	gun	carriage.
‘Quickly,’	Akbar	shouted	to	two	of	his	bodyguards	behind	him,	‘you,	plant	our	green	banner	on	the	roof
of	this	building	to	show	we	occupy	the	fort.	You,	find	Muhammad	Beg.	Tell	him	to	order	our	remaining
troops	 to	 ride	 round	 the	 fort	 walls	 as	 fast	 as	 they	 can	 to	 prevent	 the	 Gujaratis	 fleeing	 north	 back	 to
Cambay.’
The	excitement	of	battle	was	still	on	Akbar,	mingling	with	his	exultation	that	Gujarat	was	now	securely
annexed	 to	 his	 growing	 empire,	 when	 towards	 evening	 that	 day	 he	 stood	 on	 top	 of	 the	 small	 sandstone
watchtower	at	the	end	of	the	inner	breakwater	protecting	the	port	of	Cambay.	The	green	Moghul	banner
flew	 above	 the	 chief	 buildings	 of	 the	 port,	 whose	 inhabitants	 had	 opened	 the	 wooden	 gates	 as	 soon	 as
news	 of	 Ibrahim	 Hussain’s	 defeat	 had	 been	 brought	 back	 by	 fugitives	 from	 the	 battle	 down	 the	 coast.
Ibrahim	 Hussain,	 wounded	 in	 the	 shoulder	 by	 a	 battleaxe,	 had	 surrendered	 and	 was	 now	 in	 a	 dungeon
awaiting	his	fate.
How	beautiful	the	sea	was,	rippling	pewter-coloured	beneath	a	sky	in	which	the	late	afternoon	sun	was
becoming	obscured	by	purple	clouds	gathering	on	the	western	horizon.	Suddenly	Akbar	decided	he	must
experience	the	ocean	himself,	something	he	had	never	done	before.
An	hour	later,	he	was	standing	in	the	prow	of	a	fifty-foot-long	dhow	which	was	bucking	up	and	down	in
waves	which	were	increasing	in	height	all	the	time.	The	dhow’s	captain	had	warned	Akbar	that	the	dark
clouds	he	had	seen	piling	the	horizon	from	the	watchtower	presaged	a	storm	but	Akbar	had	insisted	on	his
putting	to	sea.	Now	the	captain,	a	short,	bandy-legged	man,	was	shouting	orders	for	sails	to	be	furled	and
for	men	to	lean	on	the	tiller	to	keep	the	bows	into	the	wind	to	allow	the	ship	to	ride	out	the	squall.	Beside
Akbar,	one	of	his	young	qorchis	was	being	violently	sick,	his	sour	vomit	speckling	his	own	clothes	and
those	of	another	squire	next	to	him.	A	third,	pale-faced	and	white-knuckled,	was	clinging	for	dear	life	to
the	base	of	the	mast	while	muttering	prayers	for	God’s	protection.
Suddenly	 a	 particularly	 large	 wave	 shattered	 over	 the	 bows,	 soaking	 Akbar	 and	 Ahmed	 Khan	 at	 his
side,	 with	 warm	 foaming	 water.	 Ahmed	 Khan	 himself	 was	 looking	 distinctly	 nervous	 as	 he	 turned	 to
Akbar.	‘Majesty,	let	us	move	to	a	less	exposed	position.	It	would	only	be	wise.’
Akbar,	 wet	 black	 hair	 blowing	 out	 behind	 him	 and	 legs	 slightly	 apart,	 braced	 against	 the	 unfamiliar
motion,	shook	his	head.	‘The	pulsing	ocean	fills	me	with	awe.	Besides,	the	captain	tells	me	the	storm	will
soon	abate.	Ignorant	of	the	ocean’s	full	strength	I	wanted	to	test	myself	on	its	waters	and	now,	despite	the
dangers	 and	 discomforts,	 I	 am	 learning	 .	 .	 .	 The	 crashing	 waves	 and	 seemingly	 limitless	 power	 of	 the
ocean	are	a	salutary	reminder	to	me	not	to	become	vainglorious	and	over-confident.	Although	I	have	led
great	armies,	won	great	victories,	filled	my	treasuries	and	come	to	reign	over	vast	millions	–	many	more
than	any	other	ruler	–	I	am	still	just	a	man,	insignificant	and	transitory	in	the	face	of	eternal	nature.’

Chapter	12

A	Cauldron	of	Heads

hat	 is	 fine	 carving.	 The	 tiger	 looks	 as	 if	 it	 could	 be	 about	 to	 spring	 upon	 me,’	 Akbar	 said	 to	 the
beaming	 craftsman	 who	 was	 standing	 by	 his	 side	 with	 a	 sharp	 chisel	 in	 one	 hand	 and	 a	 wooden
mallet	in	the	other.	The	two	men	were	not	looking	at	some	of	the	excellent	sandstone	carving	Akbar
had	seen	on	the	buildings	of	Sikri	on	his	return	from	his	conquest	of	Gujarat.	Instead,	they	were	standing
on	 a	 wooden	 quay	 on	 the	 bank	 of	 the	 River	 Jumna	 at	 Agra,	 gazing	 up	 at	 the	 intricately	 carved	 new
figurehead	of	a	river	boat.	‘With	the	tiger	at	the	prow,	this	vessel	will	make	an	excellent	flagship	in	my
campaign	in	Bengal.’
Almost	 as	 soon	 as	 Akbar	 had	 reached	 Sikri,	 messages	 had	 begun	 to	 arrive	 from	 his	 chief	 general	 in
Bengal,	 Munim	 Khan.	 The	 first	 said	 that	 the	 young	 Shah	 Daud,	 who	 now	 ruled	 the	 area	 as	 a	 vassal	 of
Akbar	after	the	recent	death	of	his	father,	had	rebelled	and	seized	the	imperial	treasuries	and	one	of	the
main	Moghul	armouries,	but	that	the	general	would	punish	him	for	his	presumption.	The	second	had	been
short	on	detail,	merely	stating	that	the	campaign	was	proving	more	difficult	than	anticipated	and	asking	for
more	troops.	Before	these	could	be	despatched,	a	third	message	had	arrived	pleading	for	Akbar	to	come
himself	because	there	was	a	stalemate.	Daud	was	occupying	the	fortress	of	Patna	which	the	general	was
besieging	but	with	insufficient	forces	to	make	his	blockade	secure.
Fresh	 from	 extending	 his	 empire	 to	 the	 western	 ocean,	 the	 idea	 of	 securing	 Bengal	 and	 its	 eastern
shores	as	a	full	imperial	possession	had	instantly	attracted	Akbar	and	without	even	pausing	to	consult	his
advisers	 he	 had	 despatched	 an	 immediate	 response	 to	 Munim	 Khan’s	 third	 letter.	 It	 had	 told	 him	 to
maintain	the	siege	as	best	he	could	without	unduly	hazarding	his	men	while	conserving	his	equipment	and
supplies	until	Akbar	came.	However,	he	had	retained	sufficient	prudence	to	tell	Munim	Khan	he	would
not	set	out	until	he	had	accumulated	a	sufficient	force	to	make	the	outcome	inevitable,	as	well	as	enough
river	transport	to	carry	his	army	down	the	Jumna	to	Allahabad	and	then	along	the	Ganges	past	Varanasi	to
Patna.	This	meant	that	he	would	not	leave	for	at	least	three	months	and	possibly	more.
He	had	decided	straight	away	that	to	impress	those	of	his	subjects	who	lived	alongside	the	two	great
waterways	of	his	empire,	his	fleet	would	be	the	most	magnificent	the	rivers	had	ever	seen.	The	very	day
he	had	despatched	his	message	to	Munim	Khan	he	had	called	his	engineers	and	shipbuilders	to	him.	He
had	commanded	the	engineers	to	begin	designing	and	building	pontoons	large	enough	and	stable	enough	to
transport	his	war	elephants	downriver,	as	well	as	ones	strong	enough	to	carry	his	largest	cannon	and	their
ammunition.	He	had	ordered	his	shipbuilders	to	acquire	as	many	river	boats	as	possible	for	conversion
into	 troop	 transports,	 and	 to	 build	 further	 vessels	 as	 fast	 as	 they	 could	 recruit	 the	 men	 and	 acquire	 the
materials	to	do	so.
Knowing	 his	 treasuries	 were	 filled	 not	 only	 with	 booty	 from	 Gujarat	 but	 also	 with	 the	 increased
revenues	 from	 his	 reforms	 to	 the	 methods	 of	 tax	 collection,	 he	 had	 determined	 to	 fill	 his	 subjects	 with
pleasure	as	well	as	awe	and	had	ordered	enough	vessels	to	allow	one	to	carry	his	orchestra	of	musicians
on	its	deck,	ready	to	play	whenever	called	upon.	Two	others	would	be	fitted	out	as	floating	gardens,	full
of	bright	flowers	with	sweet	scents	which	the	river	breezes	could	waft	to	the	shore.	A	fourth	would	be

‘T

equipped	as	a	platform	for	displays	of	fireworks	by	his	magicians	from	Kashgar.	For	his	own	pleasure,
one	boat	was	to	be	modified	to	carry	his	favourite	hunting	dogs	and	leopards	as	well	as	his	falcons	and
horses	so	he	could	go	ashore	to	hunt	whenever	he	pleased,	and	the	very	best	craftsmen	were	to	construct	a
large	 ship	 from	 teak	 to	 carry	 the	 favourite	 members	 of	 his	 haram	 in	 the	 greatest	 luxury	 and	 comfort
possible.	 Bathtubs	 were	 to	 be	 installed	 in	 which	 they	 could	 bathe	 in	 warm,	 scented	 water,	 and	 large,
intricately	carved	wooden	screens	running	all	around	the	boat	would	protect	their	activities	from	prying
eyes.
Finally,	he	had	commissioned	two	kitchen	boats.	To	allow	his	tandoor	ovens,	cooking	cauldrons	and
roasting	spits	to	operate	as	safely	as	possible,	one	would	have	part	of	its	interior	lined	with	thin	sheets	of
beaten	 copper.	 The	 other	 would	 have	 holds	 which	 could	 be	 filled	 with	 ice	 brought	 down	 from	 the
mountains	to	conserve	melons,	grapes	and	other	fruit.	Satisfied	that	he	had	thought	of	everything,	Akbar
had	settled	down	to	wait,	not	very	patiently,	for	the	moment	when	his	campaign	could	begin.
‘Majesty,	we	cannot	sail	today,’	said	Ahmed	Khan.	‘The	monsoon	is	at	its	height	and	the	ships’	captains
are	worried	that	the	force	of	the	flood	waters	flowing	so	fiercely	downstream	will	make	it	hazardous	for
us	to	cast	off,	to	manoeuvre	our	vessels	into	formation	and	even	to	anchor	with	safety	at	the	end	of	the
day’s	journey.	Also,	the	deep	mud	and	swamps	on	the	riverbank	will	make	it	difficult	for	the	squadrons	of
horsemen	designated	to	accompany	our	passage	to	keep	up	with	us.’
Akbar	thought	for	a	moment.	Ahmed	Khan	was	growing	cautious	with	age.	‘No,	I	am	determined	that
we	 will	 start	 today,	 even	 if	 we	 make	 slow	 progress.	 We	 will	 take	 as	 many	 precautions	 as	 we	 can,	 for
example	by	only	manoeuvring	a	single	vessel	at	a	time,	but	we	will	go.	To	set	out	and	head	down	the	river
when	others	would	not	will	only	strengthen	the	impression	of	invincible	power	I	intend	to	impart	to	all
who	witness	our	journey	and	to	all	those	who	come	to	hear	of	it,	especially	Shah	Daud.	Unless	he	is	even
more	of	a	fool	than	I	think	him,	he	will	have	his	spies	monitoring	our	progress.’
An	 hour	 later,	 the	 rain	 had	 temporarily	 ceased	 and	 a	 watery	 sun	 was	 shining	 through	 piles	 of	 puffy
white	clouds.	Akbar	stood	in	the	bow	of	his	flagship,	just	above	the	ornately	carved	tiger’s	head.	As	he
watched,	rowers	naked	except	for	cotton	loincloths	were	sweating	profusely	as	they	bent	their	backs	over
the	oars,	rowing	against	the	current	to	hold	the	large	vessel	as	still	as	they	could	in	midstream	while,	one
by	one,	his	riverboats	were	rowed	and	pulled	by	small	boats	into	the	current.	There	had	been	no	incidents
beyond	a	couple	of	small	barges	bumping,	and	he	prayed	that	his	whole	campaign	would	go	so	well.	He
must	make	sure	of	it.	It	must	not	falter	because	he	failed	to	take	sufficient	care	in	his	planning,	or	in	his
oversight	of	how	his	commanders	put	his	plans	into	practice.
The	sheet	lightning	was	flickering	along	the	dark	clouds	piling	the	horizon	as	the	line	of	servants	carried
up	 the	 ridged	 wooden	 gangplank	 of	 one	 of	 Akbar’s	 river	 boats	 the	 trophies	 of	 his	 most	 recent	 hunting
expedition.	The	lifeless	bodies	of	eight	tigers	–	one	measuring	at	least	seven	foot	from	head	to	tail	–	were
each	suspended	from	strong	bamboo	poles	supported	on	the	shoulders	of	groups	of	four	men.	Behind	them
others	 carried	 the	 carcasses	 of	 deer,	 their	 bellies	 already	 slit	 and	 their	 entrails	 removed,	 ready	 to	 be
skinned,	spitted	and	cooked	for	the	evening	meal.	At	the	end	of	the	line,	the	last	servants	had	clutches	of
brightly	feathered	ducks	hanging	limply	from	their	shoulders.
Akbar	 himself	 had	 already	 washed	 and	 changed	 his	 rain-soaked	 and	 mud-spattered	 clothes	 for	 clean
dry	ones.	Sipping	the	juice	of	red-fleshed	watermelons,	he	watched	as	the	final	preparations	were	made
for	 departure.	 They	 had	 become	 routine	 to	 the	 sailors	 as	 Akbar	 had	 insisted	 on	 hunting	 expeditions	 on

most	 afternoons	 since	 their	 departure	 from	 Agra,	 arguing	 that	 they	 were	 a	 good	 opportunity	 for	 his
horsemen	 to	 exercise	 their	 mounts	 and	 his	 musketeers	 to	 demonstrate	 their	 skill,	 as	 well	 as	 providing
sport	for	himself.	He	had	only	varied	the	routine	when,	at	least	once	a	week,	he	ordered	Muhammad	Beg,
Ravi	 Singh	 and	 others	 of	 his	 generals	 to	 drill	 his	 infantry	 on	 any	 dry	 ground	 that	 they	 could	 find,	 and
when,	 ten	 days	 ago,	 he	 had	 gone	 ashore	 at	 Allahabad,	 the	 holy	 city	 at	 the	 confluence	 of	 the	 Jumna	 and
Ganges,	 where	 he	 had	 arranged	 with	 the	 governor	 to	 make	 a	 ceremonial	 procession	 through	 the	 streets
before	his	Kashgar	magicians	organised	a	show	of	fireworks	from	the	city	walls	in	the	evening.
He	turned	to	Ahmed	Khan,	at	his	side.	‘How	many	more	weeks	do	you	think	it	will	take	us	to	reach
Patna?’
‘Perhaps	a	month,	but	much	will	depend	on	the	monsoon.	We’ve	been	lucky	so	far.	The	only	serious
accident	was	that	time	when	two	pontoons	collided	and	we	lost	three	cannon	to	the	bottom	of	the	Jumna.
However,	 as	 the	 Ganges	 begins	 to	 widen	 out	 we’ll	 encounter	 more	 shallows	 and	 mud	 banks	 and	 the
chances	of	running	aground	will	increase.	Shah	Daud	may	even	attempt	ambushes	to	delay	us.	We	know
that	he	tried	to	bribe	some	river	pirates	to	attack	us.’
‘But	they	wisely	refused,	didn’t	they?’
‘Yes,	 Majesty.	 Some	 even	 brought	 the	 news	 to	 us.	 We’ll	 also	 have	 to	 beware	 of	 the	 river	 forts
defending	the	approaches	to	Patna.	Our	scouts	tell	me	they	are	well	manned	and	well	provisioned.’
‘During	the	passage	downriver	I	have	given	a	lot	of	thought	to	how	to	unsettle	young	Shah	Daud	and
undermine	his	men’s	confidence	in	him.	Now	would	seem	a	good	time	to	make	the	attempt.’
‘What	do	you	mean,	Majesty?	How?’	Ahmed	Khan	looked	genuinely	surprised.
‘Why	don’t	I	write	to	him	enumerating	the	strength	of	our	army	and	offering	him	the	opportunity	to	send
ambassadors	to	witness	the	truth	of	my	claims?	I	will	go	on	to	offer	to	forgo	my	advantage	in	men	and
equipment	and	to	settle	matters	in	single	combat	with	him	if	he	will	agree.’
‘But	what	if	he	says	yes?’
‘I’m	sure	he	won’t,	but	if	he	does	all	the	better.	I	am	the	equal	of	any	man	in	battle,	never	mind	a	callow
youth	as	he	is	reputed	to	be.	We	will	save	many	lives	and	much	time	and	trouble	that	way.’
‘How	do	you	expect	him	to	react,	then?’
‘To	dismiss	our	offer	with	what	he	means	to	be	a	confident	smile	but	–	unless	he’s	a	braver	man	than	I
think	or	a	better	actor	–	will	seem	a	nervous	one	to	those	around	him.	When	his	troops	come	to	hear	of	my
proposal	–	as	we’ll	make	sure	they	do	–	they	should	be	impressed	by	our	confidence.	His	refusal	of	single
combat	will	make	them	think	their	leader	something	of	a	coward	and	thus	undermine	their	morale.’
‘It	may	work,	Majesty,’	said	Ahmed	Khan,	still	looking	doubtful.
‘It	should.	My	own	campaigns	have	taught	me	that	my	grandfather	Babur	was	right	when	he	wrote	that
as	many	battles	are	won	in	the	mind	before	troops	even	come	in	sight	of	each	other	as	are	won	on	the	field
of	battle	itself.	In	any	case,	to	make	the	offer	costs	us	nothing.’
At	that	moment,	a	crack	of	thunder	erupted	overhead	from	the	leaden	clouds	that	had	continued	to	fill
the	sky	as	they	spoke	and	the	warm	monsoon	rain	began	to	pour	down	once	more,	millions	of	fat	drops
splashing	into	the	Ganges	and	on	to	Akbar’s	fleet	as	it	completed	its	preparations	to	cast	off.
Akbar	 stood	 with	 Ahmed	 Khan	 on	 the	 muddy	 banks	 of	 the	 Ganges	 looking	 towards	 one	 of	 the	 forts
protecting	the	approaches	to	Patna.	Its	strong	fifty-foot-high	walls,	stone	at	the	bottom	and	brick	further
up,	 towered	 over	 them	 and	 Akbar	 could	 see	 the	 long	 barrels	 of	 bronze	 cannon	 on	 the	 battlements.	 The
weapons	would	have	a	clear	field	of	fire	over	the	river	and	across	the	paddy	fields,	bright	green	with	rice
shoots,	 which	 covered	 most	 of	 the	 banks	 of	 the	 Ganges	 at	 this	 time	 of	 year.	 His	 troops	 would	 need	 to

cross	them	as	fast	as	possible	as	they	moved	to	assault	the	fortress’s	walls.
Shah	Daud	had	–	as	Akbar	expected	–	made	no	response	to	his	offer	of	single	combat.	Akbar’s	flotilla,
moving	as	quickly	as	the	monsoon	would	allow,	had	reached	this	point	on	the	Ganges	two	days	ago.	The
previous	 night,	 after	 a	 brief	 war	 council,	 he	 had	 ordered	 part	 of	 his	 fleet	 under	 the	 command	 of	 Ravi
Singh	 to	 sail	 under	 cover	 of	 darkness	 past	 the	 fort,	 and	 braving	 its	 guns,	 to	 land	 a	 powerful	 force
downstream	 ready	 to	 attack	 the	 fort	 from	 that	 direction.	 Akbar	 knew	 how	 lucky	 he	 had	 been	 that	 the
monsoon	 clouds	 had	 covered	 the	 moon	 and	 the	 rain	 had	 been	 incessant,	 so	 that	 his	 ships	 had	 come
undetected	 almost	 abreast	 of	 the	 fort.	 However,	 an	 alert	 sentry	 had	 then	 given	 the	 alarm	 and	 the	 fort’s
cannon	had	begun	to	fire.
A	pontoon	carrying	five	war	elephants	had	been	hit	and	begun	to	sink.	Amid	the	cannon	smoke	and	with
the	river	running	at	full	spate	downstream,	a	large	boat	bearing	some	of	Akbar’s	best	archers,	recruited
from	his	father’s	homelands	around	Kabul,	had	collided	with	the	semi-submerged	elephant	pontoon	and
been	 holed	 in	 the	 prow	 below	 the	 waterline.	 As	 the	 vessel	 began	 to	 take	 in	 water	 and	 the	 intricately
carved	peacock	at	its	bow	dipped	below	the	surface,	the	musketeers	and	artillerymen	on	the	walls	of	the
fort	had	started	to	find	their	range.
More	cannon	balls	had	hit	the	sinking	pontoon,	killing	two	of	the	elephants.	Another,	wounded	in	the
belly,	had	fallen	into	the	river	where	it	floated	on	its	back,	thrashing	its	shackled	legs	and	trumpeting	in
pain,	blood	from	the	gaping	wound	in	its	stomach	mingling	with	the	muddy	river	water.	At	the	same	time,
the	vessel	carrying	Akbar’s	archers	had	been	holed	again	and	was	now	itself	half	submerged.
Several	archers	had	fallen	dead	or	wounded	from	the	stricken	barge	into	the	water.	Others,	stripping	off
their	 breastplates	 and	 throwing	 aside	 their	 weapons,	 had	 jumped	 into	 the	 river	 in	 an	 attempt	 to	 swim
ashore	 or	 to	 other	 boats.	 Suddenly	 sinuous	 shapes	 had	 appeared	 in	 the	 dark	 waters	 –	 bright-eyed
crocodiles	attracted	by	the	smell	of	blood.	High-pitched	screams	had	mingled	with	the	sounds	of	battle	as
men	had	begun	to	disappear	beneath	the	water	despite	the	attempts	by	musketeers	on	other	ships	to	shoot
the	crocodiles,	whose	sharp	teeth	had	quickly	reduced	the	wounded	elephant	to	a	hunk	of	bloody,	mangled
red	meat.
At	first	light,	Akbar’s	men	had	found	dozens	of	partly	dismembered	bodies	of	archers,	a	half-eaten	limb
here,	a	bloody	torso	there,	which	had	floated	into	the	shallows	downstream.	They	had	even	had	to	drive
off	packs	of	scrawny	pariah	dogs	intent	on	finishing	the	feasting	the	crocodiles	had	begun.	Yet	despite	the
losses	the	good	news	had	reached	Akbar	that	the	rest	of	Ravi	Singh’s	ships	had	succeeded	in	avoiding	the
collision	 and	 passing	 downstream	 of	 the	 fort	 with	 relatively	 few	 casualties,	 and	 had	 soon	 begun
transporting	 men	 and	 equipment	 ashore.	 The	 strategy	 agreed	 at	 the	 war	 council	 to	 encircle	 the	 fort	 and
then	to	attack	it	from	all	sides	was	working.
‘Ahmed	Khan,	how	much	longer	before	the	forces	we	landed	upstream	will	have	joined	up	with	those
advancing	from	downstream?’
‘Perhaps	another	hour.	There’ve	been	no	sorties	from	the	fort	to	try	to	disrupt	them.’
‘Good.	 Are	 the	 pontoons	 carrying	 cannon	 ready	 to	 float	 down	 past	 the	 fort	 firing	 as	 they	 go	 when	 I
order	the	attack?’
‘Yes.	The	artillerymen	are	aboard.	The	first	round	of	shot	is	already	loaded	and	the	powder	is	being
protected	as	best	we	can	from	the	rains	by	oiled	awnings.	The	troops	that	are	to	assault	the	river	gate	into
the	fort	are	in	their	rowing	boats.’
An	hour	later	Akbar	gave	the	word	and	the	sailors	aboard	the	ten	pontoons	bearing	the	cannon	cut	the
anchor	ropes	that	had	been	holding	them	in	midstream.	Guided	by	the	sailors’	long	oars,	the	large	wooden
vessels	 moved	 quickly	 downstream.	 As	 soon	 as	 he	 was	 in	 range	 of	 the	 fort,	 the	 officer	 on	 the	 leading
pontoon	 –	 a	 tall,	 bushy-bearded	 man	 dressed	 entirely	 in	 red	 –	 signalled	 to	 the	 teams	 manning	 the	 two

cannon	under	his	command	to	open	fire.
Carefully	shielding	the	lit	taper	with	their	cupped	hands	against	rain	blowing	under	the	awning,	two	of
the	artillerymen	put	the	flame	to	the	touchholes.	Both	cannon	fired	despite	the	damp,	their	recoil	sending
the	pontoon	swaying	up	and	down	in	the	fast-moving	current	and	causing	one	gunner	to	fall	into	the	water,
only	 for	 a	 comrade	 to	 pull	 him	 out	 before	 any	 lurking	 crocodile	 could	 grab	 him.	 As	 the	 men	 tried
desperately	to	reload	on	the	bobbing	vessel,	the	cannon	on	the	other	pontoons	fired	and	a	swirling	layer	of
white	smoke	soon	lay	over	the	river,	mingling	with	the	rain.
Akbar	 was	 standing	 in	 an	 advanced	 position	 on	 a	 low	 mud	 promontory	 jutting	 out	 into	 the	 river.
Through	 one	 of	 the	 occasional	 gaps	 in	 the	 smoke	 he	 could	 see	 that	 some	 damage	 had	 been	 done	 to	 the
fort’s	water	gate,	which	seemed	to	have	been	dislodged	from	one	of	its	great	hinges.	Now	was	the	time	to
attack,	 before	 the	 defenders	 could	 reinforce	 the	 damaged	 portion.	 ‘Send	 in	 the	 boats,’	 he	 shouted,
struggling	to	make	himself	heard	over	the	din	of	his	own	cannon	firing	and	the	answering	shots	from	Shah
Daud’s	men	within	the	fort.
From	where	he	stood,	Akbar	could	also	see	that	on	land	his	war	elephants	were	trampling	through	the
muddy	water	of	the	rice	paddies	towards	the	fort,	crushing	the	delicate	green	plants	beneath	their	large
feet.	 Musketeers	 were	 firing	 from	 the	 howdahs	 swaying	 on	 their	 backs,	 attempting	 to	 pick	 off	 those
manning	the	cannon	on	the	walls.	More	of	his	soldiers	ran	behind	the	elephants,	fighting	the	suction	of	the
deep	 mud	 on	 their	 feet	 and	 taking	 what	 cover	 they	 could	 from	 the	 animals’	 bulk	 as	 they	 did	 so.	 Some
carried	between	them	long,	roughly	fashioned	scaling	ladders	to	assault	the	walls.	One	elephant	hit	in	the
head	by	a	cannon	ball	had	collapsed	into	a	rice	paddy	and	Moghul	infantry	were	now	using	its	body	as	a
protective	barricade	to	assemble	behind	before	rushing	to	the	final	assault	on	the	walls.	All	was	going
well,	at	least	for	the	present.
Suddenly,	 turning	 back	 to	 the	 action	 on	 the	 fast-flowing	 Ganges,	 Akbar	 saw	 one	 of	 the	 rowing	 boats
packed	full	of	his	troops	going	forward	to	attack	the	water	gate	approach	within	a	few	yards	of	the	shore.
Avoiding	Ahmed	Khan’s	restraining	hand	he	rushed	instinctively	through	the	shallows	towards	it,	careless
of	 the	 presence	 of	 any	 crocodiles	 in	 his	 eagerness	 to	 join	 the	 attack.	 Recognising	 him	 by	 his	 gilded
breastplate,	his	men	cheered	as	they	hauled	him	over	the	boat’s	wooden	side.
Quickly	 scrambling	 to	 his	 feet,	 Akbar	 stood	 in	 the	 bow	 urging	 the	 rowers	 on	 towards	 the	 gateway.
Moments	later,	however,	he	was	propelled	backwards	as	if	by	a	giant	hand	pushing	him	in	the	chest.	He
landed	awkwardly	across	one	of	the	wooden	struts	in	the	bottom	of	the	boat	and	lay	there,	winded	and
confused.	 What	 had	 happened?	 He	 could	 feel	 no	 running	 blood	 but	 his	 right	 side	 felt	 numb	 and	 he
explored	his	breastplate	with	his	hand.	There	was	no	hole	in	it	but	a	dent	beneath	which	a	dull	pain	was
now	spreading.	He	must	have	been	hit	by	a	half-spent	musket	ball.
Brushing	aside	the	attentions	of	his	men	clustering	around	him,	he	sat	up	to	see	that	the	boat	was	now
only	a	few	yards	from	the	watergate,	and	that	some	fortunate	or	very	well-aimed	shots	from	his	floating
cannon	had	broken	down	the	iron	grille	protecting	the	ten-foot-high	entrance	and	splintered	the	wooden
gate	itself.	Troops	from	another	of	his	boats	were	already	running	towards	it,	zigzagging	as	they	did	so	to
put	the	musketeers	and	archers	on	the	wall	above	off	their	aim.	However,	as	Akbar	watched,	several	of
them	fell	and	the	rest	retreated,	some	dragging	wounded	comrades	with	them	to	what	little	protection	was
afforded	by	a	small	stone	hut	at	the	end	of	a	little	jetty	about	ten	yards	from	the	gate.
Scrambling	over	the	prow	of	the	boat	without	waiting	for	it	to	be	fully	grounded,	Akbar	jumped	into	a
foot	of	water	and	splashed	ashore,	yelling,	‘Follow	me	into	the	gateway.	The	faster	we	run	the	less	the
danger.’	 Waving	 his	 sword	 he	 charged	 forward,	 keeping	 as	 low	 as	 he	 could.	 He	 was	 followed
immediately	 by	 thirty	 of	 his	 men,	 musket	 balls	 and	 arrows	 hissing	 through	 the	 air	 around	 them.	 Seeing
Akbar,	the	men	sheltering	in	the	hut	on	the	jetty	charged	forward	again	too.	Having	a	shorter	distance	to

cover,	 one	 of	 them	 –	 an	 officer	 wearing	 a	 green	 turban	 –	 was	 first	 through	 the	 damaged	 gate,	 sword	 in
hand,	but	a	musket	ball	hit	him	in	the	forehead	as	he	shouted	to	his	men	to	follow.	Spun	round	by	the	force
of	 the	 impact,	 he	 collapsed	 just	 inside	 the	 fort.	 However,	 his	 men	 obeyed	 his	 last	 command	 and	 by	 the
time	Akbar	reached	the	gateway	himself	there	were	a	dozen	or	so	men	already	there,	flattening	themselves
against	the	wall	to	present	the	lowest	profile	to	the	defenders.	Yet	more	were	running	up,	feet	sometimes
slithering	and	sliding	on	the	mud,	from	more	boats	which	had	just	grounded	on	the	shore.
Glancing	upward	to	the	walls	as	he	caught	his	breath,	Akbar	realised	that	the	defenders	were	becoming
increasingly	preoccupied	with	the	assault	from	the	landward	side	to	have	much	time	to	spare	to	combat
those	entering	through	the	watergate.	Pointing	to	a	stone	staircase	leading	up	to	the	walls	about	forty	yards
away,	 Akbar	 shouted,	 ‘Let	 us	 climb	 that	 and	 take	 some	 of	 the	 defenders	 in	 the	 rear,’	 and	 ran	 forward
himself,	 taking	 what	 cover	 he	 could	 by	 staying	 close	 to	 the	 wall.	 An	 arrow	 hit	 an	 infantryman	 running
behind	him	in	the	throat	and	another	clattered	off	his	own	breastplate	but	Akbar	remained	unscathed	as,
breathing	hard	again,	he	reached	the	base	of	the	steep	stairway	and	without	pausing	began	to	climb.
Suddenly	the	body	of	one	of	the	defenders	on	the	wall	above	fell,	transfixed	by	a	spear.	With	a	thud	and
a	crunch	of	bone	it	hit	the	stone	staircase	just	above	Akbar.	He	only	just	managed	to	dodge	aside	as	the
broken	body	rolled	down	the	rest	of	the	steps	past	him,	skull	banging	on	each	sharp-edged	step	as	it	came.
Then	leaping	up	the	remaining	steps	two	at	a	time	Akbar	was	on	the	battlements.	He	thrust	at	a	small	man
who	 was	 using	 all	 his	 puny	 strength	 to	 try	 to	 dislodge	 one	 of	 Akbar’s	 scaling	 ladders.	 He	 fell	 with	 a
jagged	slash	to	the	base	of	his	neck	and	Akbar	cut	hard	at	a	second	who	was	bending	over	the	battlements
to	 fire	 on	 the	 Moghuls	 climbing	 the	 scaling	 ladders.	 The	 sword	 stroke	 took	 him	 across	 the	 back	 of	 his
knees,	 severing	 his	 tendons,	 and	 he	 fell	 over	 the	 wall,	 arms	 flailing.	 A	 third	 man	 turned	 to	 face	 Akbar,
who	easily	parried	his	first	clumsy	sword	swing	with	his	own	weapon	and	then	slid	the	long	slim-bladed
dagger	he	held	in	his	other	hand	into	the	man’s	side,	deep	between	his	ribs.	As	Akbar	wrenched	his	blade
free,	 the	 man	 collapsed,	 and	 immediately	 red	 blood	 frothed	 and	 welled	 up	 between	 his	 lips	 as	 well	 as
from	the	wound.
Looking	round,	Akbar	saw	that	by	now	so	many	of	his	men	were	either	running	up	the	staircase	from	the
courtyard	or	clambering	off	the	scaling	ladders	on	to	the	battlements	that	they	outnumbered	the	defenders,
who	for	a	while	continued	to	fight	bravely.	But	then,	isolated	and	often	wounded,	more	and	more	of	them
were	throwing	down	their	weapons	and	surrendering.
‘The	 fort	 is	 ours,’	 shouted	 Akbar	 in	 triumph.	 ‘Make	 sure	 none	 of	 the	 defenders	 gets	 away.’	 Another
victory	was	his.
Towards	dusk	that	day	Akbar	stood	in	the	fortress	courtyard	and	slapped	at	one	of	the	host	of	mosquitoes
which	filled	the	air	at	that	time	of	day,	infuriating	man	and	beast	alike	with	their	sharp	bites	and	whirring
whine.	Turning	to	Ahmed	Khan	at	his	side,	he	asked,	‘Have	we	learned	anything	of	significance	from	our
interrogation	of	the	prisoners?’
‘One	 of	 the	 most	 senior	 officers	 told	 us	 of	 Shah	 Daud’s	 discomfort	 when	 he	 received	 your	 offer	 of
single	 combat.	 He	 said	 that	 the	 shah	 read	 it	 two	 or	 three	 times,	 on	 each	 occasion	 turning	 paler,	 before
crumpling	 the	 paper,	 throwing	 it	 into	 a	 fire	 and	 wiping	 away	 some	 beads	 of	 perspiration	 from	 his
forehead.	It	was	only	when	one	of	the	copies	of	the	message	that	you	distributed	was	shown	to	him	a	day
or	 two	 later	 that	 he	 made	 any	 comment.	 It	 was	 to	 dismiss	 single	 combat	 as	 better	 fitting	 squabbles
between	leaders	of	gangs	of	common	dacoits	than	disputes	between	rulers.	However,	the	officer	told	us
that	Shah	Daud	doubled	the	number	of	his	bodyguard	just	in	case	you	should	attempt	to	ambush	him.’
‘If	 young	 Shah	 Daud	 is	 susceptible	 to	 our	 testing	 of	 his	 resolve	 and	 courage,	 we	 must	 think	 how	 to

frighten	him	some	more.’	As	he	spoke,	Akbar’s	eye	was	caught	by	a	party	of	his	men	under	the	command
of	 a	 junior	 officer	 who	 were	 slinging	 the	 bodies	 of	 some	 of	 their	 dead	 enemies	 on	 to	 untidy	 piles	 of
corpses	in	one	corner	of	the	courtyard.	Suddenly	an	idea	occurred	to	him	and	he	went	on,	‘The	souls	of
those	dead	men	over	there	have	already	passed	from	their	bodies	so	they	can	no	longer	serve	them	any
useful	purpose,	can	they,	Ahmed	Khan?’
‘So	our	religion	teaches	us,	Majesty.’
‘Nevertheless,	they	may	yet	save	the	lives	of	some	of	their	comrades	by	helping	to	persuade	Shah	Daud
to	surrender	earlier	than	he	might	have	done.’
‘How?’
‘Have	fifty	of	the	bodies	decapitated	and	the	heads	placed	in	a	large	copper	cooking	cauldron.	Have
the	cauldron	covered	with	a	fine	brocade	secured	tightly	round	the	rim.	Then	send	it	under	a	flag	of	truce
into	Patna	with	a	message	once	again	inviting	Shah	Daud	to	face	me	in	single	combat	and	telling	him	that
if	he	still	refuses	more	of	his	men	will	needlessly	lose	their	heads	and	he	will	be	their	executioner.’
‘Won’t	such	an	action	make	us	appear	the	barbarians	our	enemies	so	often	claim	we	are?’	Ahmed	Khan
looked	appalled.
‘So	much	the	better.	We	know	we’re	not	and	the	more	fear	we	can	induce	in	Shah	Daud	and	his	men	the
sooner	they	will	surrender.	Start	hacking	the	heads	now.’
‘The	cauldron	of	heads	did	its	task,	Majesty.	By	the	time	they	reached	Shah	Daud	they	were	putrefying	in
the	heat.	When	he	had	the	tie	around	the	brocade	cut	and	lifted	the	material	to	peer	inside,	a	cloud	of	black
flies	burst	out	together	with	an	unimaginable	stench.	Shah	Daud	turned	away	and	retched	from	the	pit	of
his	stomach,	and	he	was	not	the	only	one	to	do	so.	Immediately	afterwards,	he	gave	the	order	for	the	best
regiments	of	his	army,	in	particular	his	horsemen	and	his	mounted	musketeers	and	archers,	to	prepare	to
leave.	Only	two	hours	later	he	was	himself	in	the	saddle	riding	through	the	gates	of	Patna.’
Akbar	 smiled	 broadly.	 He	 had	 been	 right	 in	 his	 assessment	 of	 Shah	 Daud,	 and	 the	 heads	 had	 indeed
saved	lives.	So	much	of	war	was	in	the	mind.	‘How	do	you	know	all	this?’	he	asked.
‘The	 commander	 he	 left	 in	 the	 city	 with	 instructions	 to	 hold	 it	 as	 long	 as	 he	 could	 lost	 no	 time	 in
sending	us	an	offer	to	surrender	if	we	would	spare	his	life.’
‘You	accepted	it,	of	course?’
‘Yes.’
‘Show	that	we	are	not	barbarians	after	all.	Make	sure	the	prisoners	from	the	garrison	are	treated	well.’
After	a	moment	Akbar	added,	‘After	a	day	or	two	let	a	few	escape	to	carry	news	of	their	good	treatment
to	their	comrades	in	outlying	forts.	It	should	induce	more	of	them	to	hand	themselves	over.’
‘Majesty.’
‘Where	is	Shah	Daud	headed?’
‘Towards	the	walled	city	of	Gumgarh	at	the	heart	of	his	family’s	ancestral	lands.’
‘Where	is	the	city,	and	how	is	it	fortified?’
‘To	the	north,	Majesty.	It	is	walled,	and	Shah	Daud	might	hope	to	hold	out	there	while	he	recruits	more
men.	Also,	his	older	relations	may	have	greater	courage	than	he	and	stiffen	his	resolve,	too.’
‘Then	we	must	cut	him	off	before	he	gets	there.’
Although	the	heavy	rain	had	ceased,	the	clouds	were	still	low	and	grey	as	in	the	uncertain	morning	light
just	a	fortnight	after	the	surrender	of	Patna	Akbar	looked	from	beneath	the	dripping	shelter	of	some	tall

palm	trees	at	a	low	hill	about	three-quarters	of	a	mile	away.	Shah	Daud’s	forces	were	encamped	in	and
around	a	small	town	which	lay	within	mud	walls	on	the	hill’s	top.	Despite	its	modest	height,	the	position
offered	 commanding	 views	 over	 the	 surrounding	 marshes.	 Shah	 Daud’s	 men,	 when	 they	 had	 seen	 the
vanguard	 of	 Akbar’s	 force	 of	 twenty	 thousand	 of	 his	 best	 men	 including	 many	 mounted	 musketeers	 and
archers	approach	late	the	previous	afternoon,	had	not	tried	to	continue	their	flight.	Instead,	throughout	the
stormy	night,	by	the	light	of	torches	guttering	in	the	rain	and	wind	as	well	as	of	the	almost	continual	sheet
lightning,	they	had	worked	hard	to	improvise	what	defences	they	could,	overturning	baggage	wagons	to
block	gaps	in	the	mud	walls	and	trying	to	shore	up	those	sections	which	had	crumbled	in	the	rain.
To	Akbar,	his	opponents	looked	to	have	done	a	good	job	in	the	time	they	had	had	available.	He	was
fortunate,	 he	 thought,	 that	 Shah	 Daud	 like	 himself	 had	 been	 travelling	 too	 quickly	 to	 bring	 any	 but	 the
smallest	cannon	with	him.	Nevertheless,	his	forces	which	numbered	roughly	the	same	as	his	own	seemed
to	be	well	supplied	with	muskets	and	his	barricades,	though	improvised,	looked	strong.	Akbar’s	scouts
had	reported	that	the	men	had	even	used	the	townspeople’s	beds	and	cooking	pots	as	well	as	the	doors	of
their	houses	as	reinforcing	material.
Despite	his	opponents’	fervid	work,	Akbar	knew	that	an	all-out	assault	was	the	best	means	to	capture
the	town	and	with	it	Shah	Daud	and	his	treasure.	By	doing	so	he	would	put	an	end	to	resistance	in	Bengal
and	 secure	 this	 rich	 and	 fertile	 land	 with	 its	 clever,	 cultured	 and	 hard-working	 people	 as	 a	 new	 and
valuable	province	for	his	empire.	Ahmed	Khan	was	as	usual	at	Akbar’s	elbow	and	the	emperor	turned
once	more	to	his	grizzled	khan-i-khanan.	‘Have	our	horsemen	completed	the	encirclement	of	the	town?’
‘Yes.	More	than	an	hour	ago.’
‘Then	 little	 remains	 but	 to	 order	 our	 trumpeters	 and	 drummers	 to	 give	 the	 signal	 for	 a	 simultaneous
charge	at	the	town’s	defences	from	all	sides.’
‘That’s	true,	Majesty,	but	there	is	one	thing	I	beg	of	you	as	an	old	comrade-in-arms	of	your	father	and
your	 chief	 general.	 Do	 not	 hazard	 yourself	 in	 the	 way	 that	 you	 did	 in	 our	 attack	 on	 the	 river	 fort.	 I
remember	your	father	Humayun	ordering	you	to	protect	yourself	for	the	sake	of	the	dynasty	and	Bairam
Khan	advising	the	same	in	the	fight	against	Hemu.	Your	sons	are	still	young.	They	would	be	in	danger	if
you	fell.	So	too	would	the	empire.’
‘I	know	you	speak	with	my	best	interests	in	mind,	and	indeed	what	you	say	is	good	advice.	Yet	I	react
and	take	risks	instinctively,	perhaps	partly	because	in	my	heart	I	feel	that	it	will	not	be	my	destiny	to	die
in	battle	–	certainly	not	so	soon,	not	before	I’ve	expanded	my	empire.	Indeed,	I	believe	–	and	sages	I’ve
consulted	confirm	this	–	the	greatest	dangers	to	me	will	not	lie	on	the	battlefield.’
‘But	as	your	father	came	to	understand,	it	is	ultimately	a	man’s	own	actions	that	decide	his	fate,	not	his
visions	 and	 feelings	 about	 his	 destiny	 .	 .	 .	 Although	 confidence	 and	 bravery	 may	 often	 allow	 you	 to
succeed	in	rash	acts	where	others	would	fail,	you	shouldn’t	rely	on	this	always	being	the	case.’
Akbar	 nodded.	 He	 must	 guard	 against	 over-confidence	 in	 battle,	 just	 as	 much	 as	 he	 tried	 to	 when
planning	his	campaigns	with	his	commanders.	‘Sometimes	the	distinction	between	setting	an	example	as	a
leader	and	foolhardiness	is	a	slim	one,	I	know.	I	will	remember	to	observe	it	as	best	I	can.	I	had	already
decided	that	today	Muhammad	Beg	should	lead	the	first	attack.	Despite	all	his	years	he	remains	as	eager
for	battle	as	the	day	he	left	Badakhshan	to	fight	with	my	grandfather.	I	will	hold	myself	and	my	bodyguard
in	reserve	so	that	we	can	add	our	weight	to	support	the	assault	wherever	it	is	needed	most.’
‘Shall	I	give	Muhammad	Beg	the	order	to	begin	the	attack,	then?’
‘Yes.’
Akbar	and	Ahmed	Khan	watched	as,	to	the	sound	of	trumpets,	the	horsemen	began	their	advance	from
all	sides	through	the	waterlogged	fields	towards	the	town	on	the	hill.	Although	hampered	by	the	glossy
black	oozing	mud	and	the	need	to	avoid	the	deepest	of	the	pools	of	water,	the	horses	slowly	picked	up

speed.	Muhammad	Beg	and	his	bodyguard	were	among	the	foremost,	with	several	green	Moghul	banners
fluttering	in	the	damp	breeze	behind	them.	As	they	came	into	range,	there	were	occasional	puffs	of	smoke
from	the	muskets	of	Shah	Daud’s	men	crouched	behind	the	barricades.	Here	and	there,	a	horse	collapsed
to	lie	twitching	after	throwing	its	rider.	Sometimes	a	horseman	fell	from	his	saddle	to	disappear	beneath
the	hooves	of	those	following,	trampled	into	the	churned	mud.	Often,	the	fallen	rider’s	mount,	freed	of	his
weight,	 outdistanced	 his	 fellows	 in	 the	 charge.	 One	 riderless	 black	 horse	 was	 the	 first	 to	 jump	 the
outermost	of	the	barricades	that	guarded	the	town	before	galloping	on	towards	a	cluster	of	single-storey
houses	above	which	Shah	Daud’s	yellow	banners	were	flying.
All	 seemed	 to	 be	 going	 well	 for	 his	 troops,	 Akbar	 thought.	 But	 then	 there	 was	 a	 sudden	 crackle	 of
disciplined	musketry	from	the	section	of	the	mud	walls	towards	which	Muhammad	Beg	and	his	men	were
advancing.	 One	 of	 the	 carts	 that	 blocked	 a	 hole	 in	 the	 wall	 was	 pushed	 aside	 and	 a	 squadron	 of	 riders
emerged	to	charge	down	the	hill,	lances	in	hand	and	bobbing	heads	bent	low	over	their	horses’	necks,	into
Muhammad	Beg’s	advancing	troops	who	recoiled	under	the	impact,	several	of	their	horses	being	knocked
together	with	their	riders	into	the	mud.	Then	the	Bengalis	opened	further	gaps	in	their	barricades	for	more
horsemen	 to	 pour	 through	 to	 join	 the	 battle.	 Within	 minutes	 many	 more	 of	 Muhammad	 Beg’s	 men	 were
down	and	only	one	of	his	green	Moghul	banners	was	still	being	held	aloft.
Akbar	could	hold	back	no	longer	–	this	fight	was	bound	to	be	crucial	to	the	outcome	of	the	battle	and	he
must	be	there	to	lead	his	men	in	person.	He	pulled	Alamgir	from	its	scabbard	and	kicked	his	horse	into	a
gallop	towards	the	mêlée,	followed	immediately	by	his	loyal	bodyguard.	It	took	him	three	minutes	at	most
to	cover	the	distance	to	the	hill,	despite	his	mount’s	slipping	in	the	mud	on	landing	after	jumping	one	of
the	pools	of	water.
As	 he	 began	 to	 urge	 the	 horse	 up	 the	 hill	 towards	 the	 fighting	 he	 came	 within	 range	 of	 Shah	 Daud’s
musketeers	who,	recognising	him	from	his	gilded	breastplate,	concentrated	much	of	their	fire	on	him.	He
heard	musket	balls	and	arrows	hiss	past	him.	Then	his	horse	staggered	for	a	moment	and	he	felt	its	warm
blood	soaking	his	right	thigh.	Hit	in	the	flank	by	a	musket	ball,	the	horse’s	pace	was	faltering	and	its	head
was	 dropping.	 Just	 before	 it	 collapsed	 Akbar	 jumped	 from	 the	 saddle	 to	 land	 on	 his	 feet	 on	 the	 muddy
ground	only	to	slip,	arms	flailing,	as	he	jerked	aside	to	avoid	one	of	his	bodyguards	who	was	riding	close
behind.
Regaining	 his	 balance,	 he	 shouted	 for	 another	 of	 his	 men	 to	 give	 him	 his	 mount.	 Immediately	 a	 rider
wheeled	round	and	leapt	from	his	grey	horse	to	offer	the	reins	to	Akbar.	Within	moments	he	was	back	in
the	 saddle,	 thrusting	 his	 mud-caked	 boots	 into	 the	 stirrups.	 However,	 the	 incident	 had	 blunted	 the
momentum	of	his	charge	and	that	of	his	bodyguard.	Some	of	Shah	Daud’s	horsemen	were	almost	on	them.
Akbar	reacted	only	just	in	time	to	swerve	his	new	mount	away	from	a	large	Bengali	whirling	a	spiked
battle	 flail	 above	 his	 helmetless	 head.	 The	 man	 was	 unable	 to	 check	 his	 horse’s	 charge	 because	 of	 its
downhill	momentum.	Despite	tugging	hard	at	his	reins	he	careered	past	Akbar,	who	slashed	at	the	back	of
his	head	with	Alamgir,	feeling	a	grating	judder	in	his	arm	as	the	sword	bit	into	the	man’s	skull.
Moments	later,	Akbar	struck	at	a	second	man	charging	down	the	hill	at	him	but	the	Bengali	ducked	and
the	 sword	 stroke	 missed.	 The	 rider	 turned	 to	 confront	 Akbar	 once	 more.	 This	 time,	 Akbar	 had	 the
advantage	of	the	slope	and	before	the	rider	could	urge	his	horse	up	through	the	thick	black	mud	towards
him,	Akbar	was	on	him,	battering	his	lance	from	his	hand	with	a	swing	of	his	sword	and	then	thrusting	its
sharp	blade	deep	into	the	man’s	groin.
Free	of	immediate	danger,	Akbar	wiped	away	some	of	the	sweat	dripping	down	his	face	with	his	arm
and	 looked	 about	 him.	 The	 heavy	 fighting	 around	 Muhammad	 Beg’s	 single	 remaining	 green	 banner	 was
now	sixty	yards	to	his	left.	Gesturing	to	those	of	his	bodyguard	who	were	still	with	him	to	follow,	Akbar
drove	the	grey	onward	into	the	heaving,	steaming	mass	of	men	and	horses.	Soon	he	had	broken	through	the

first	circle	of	combatants	into	a	scene	of	carnage	where	Muhammad	Beg’s	charge	had	been	halted	by	the
musketry	and	cavalry	of	Shah	Daud.	The	bodies	of	several	horses	lay	in	the	mud.	Akbar	noticed	one	of
them	was	still	kicking	its	hind	legs	feebly.	Beneath	another	he	recognised	the	corpse	of	one	of	Muhammad
Beg’s	 qorchis	 –	 a	 youth	 of	 scarcely	 more	 than	 sixteen	 whose	 beardless	 cheek	 had	 been	 slashed	 wide
open,	exposing	his	jaw	bone	and	perfect	white	teeth.
Fighting	 was	 still	 going	 on.	 Several	 Bengalis	 were	 trying	 to	 run	 through	 with	 their	 lances	 some	 of
Muhammad	 Beg’s	 unhorsed	 men	 who	 seemed	 to	 be	 protecting	 a	 mud-covered	 figure	 propped,	 legs
widespread,	head	slumped,	with	his	back	against	a	rock.	It	was	Muhammad	Beg	himself,	Akbar	realised
with	horror.	Pushing	his	mount	onwards	with	even	greater	urgency	towards	the	combatants,	who	were	too
preoccupied	with	the	fighting	in	front	of	them	to	detect	his	approach,	Akbar	struck	the	horse	of	the	nearest
Bengali	across	the	rump	with	the	flat	of	his	sword.	As	he	intended,	it	reared	up,	throwing	its	rider,	who
fell	beneath	the	hooves	of	Akbar’s	own	mount.
Next	Akbar	cut	another	of	the	Bengalis,	who	was	about	to	run	one	of	the	qorchis	 through,	 across	 the
nape	 of	 his	 neck	 and	 he	 fell	 forward,	 losing	 his	 grip	 on	 his	 lance.	 By	 now,	 Akbar’s	 bodyguard	 had
accounted	 for	 three	 more	 Bengalis	 and	 the	 rest,	 losing	 stomach	 for	 the	 fight,	 were	 turning	 to	 try	 to	 ride
back	up	the	hill	through	the	clinging	mud	to	the	protection	of	the	town’s	walls.	Only	one	of	them	made	it,
and	by	the	time	he	did	so	he	had	a	throwing	dagger	protruding	from	the	muscle	of	his	upper	arm.
Pausing	for	just	a	moment,	Akbar	shouted	to	one	of	the	qorchis,	‘What	happened	to	Muhammad	Beg?’
‘The	Bengalis	recognised	him	as	a	general	as	he	rode	beneath	our	green	banners.	A	musket	ball	hit	him
in	the	shoulder.	When	he	fell	from	his	horse	he	hit	his	head	and	later	was	wounded	by	a	Bengal	lance	in
the	thigh.’
‘Get	him	back	to	the	hakims	as	soon	as	you	can.	He	wouldn’t	have	lived	this	long	if	he	wasn’t	tough.	If
anyone	can	survive	those	wounds	it’s	him.’
With	that,	Akbar	urged	his	blowing	horse	up	the	hill	towards	the	town’s	barricades.	Some	of	his	men
had	 already	 breached	 them	 and	 were	 now	 pushing	 towards	 the	 cluster	 of	 houses	 with	 the	 yellow	 flags,
dodging	from	the	shelter	of	one	mean	mud	hut	to	another,	disturbing	a	few	skinny	chickens	as	they	did	so.
Three	 of	 his	 musketeers	 were	 crouching	 behind	 the	 brick	 wall	 of	 a	 well,	 resting	 their	 muskets	 on	 its
parapet	to	steady	their	weapons	to	provide	covering	fire	for	a	colleague	who	was	attempting	to	drag	a
wounded	comrade	behind	the	shelter	of	a	steaming	midden.	Eventually	he	succeeded	and	the	musketeers
moved	forward	again.
Before	 either	 they	 or	 Akbar	 could	 reach	 the	 houses	 above	 which	 the	 yellow	 flags	 fluttered	 –	 surely
Shah	 Daud’s	 command	 post	 –	 Akbar	 saw	 green	 banners	 appearing	 over	 the	 hill	 behind	 the	 houses.	 His
men	had	clearly	breached	the	barricades	in	many	places	and	were	having	much	the	best	of	the	fighting.	A
moment	or	two	later	three	men	came	out	of	one	of	the	houses.	One	advanced,	arms	raised	in	surrender,
towards	Akbar’s	men.	The	two	others	first	deliberately	threw	down	the	yellow	banners	into	the	mud	and
then	 raised	 their	 hands.	 Victory	 was	 his,	 thought	 Akbar,	 punching	 the	 air	 above	 his	 head	 with	 his	 fist.
Realising	what	was	happening,	his	men	too	began	to	cheer	with	a	mixture	of	elation	at	victory	and	relief
at	survival.
‘Order	them	to	bring	Shah	Daud	to	me,’	shouted	Akbar.	A	look	of	consternation	crossed	the	face	of	the
Bengali	 to	 whom	 the	 command	 was	 given	 but	 he	 disappeared	 back	 into	 one	 of	 the	 houses,	 dipping	 his
head	 beneath	 the	 low	 lintel	 as	 he	 entered.	 No	 one	 emerged	 for	 some	 minutes	 and	 Akbar	 was	 about	 to
order	his	soldiers	to	force	their	way	in	when	a	tall,	distinguished	figure	with	a	long	thin	face	appeared	in
the	doorway	and	began	to	walk	slowly	towards	Akbar.	When	he	was	about	fifteen	feet	away	he	prostrated
himself	in	the	mud.	He	was	clearly	at	least	twice	the	nineteen	years	of	age	Akbar	knew	Shah	Daud	to	be.
‘Who	are	you?	Where	is	Shah	Daud?	If	he’s	hiding	inside,	bring	him	to	me	immediately.’

‘I	am	Ustad	Ali,	Shah	Daud’s	maternal	uncle.	I	have	been	his	chief	adviser	throughout	his	rising.	Mine
is	 the	 guilt	 and	 responsibility.	 I	 sent	 my	 nephew	 away	 in	 disguise	 last	 night	 when	 I	 realised	 our	 forces
faced	 defeat,	 however	 hard	 we	 fought.	 All	 his	 treasure	 is	 within	 these	 houses	 and	 I	 surrender	 it,	 and
Bengal,	to	you	on	his	behalf.’
Akbar	gazed	out	across	the	Bay	of	Bengal	from	the	deck	of	a	high-prowed	wooden	dhow.	Having	gone	to
sea	on	the	western	ocean	he	had	been	seized	by	the	desire	to	do	the	same	on	the	eastern	and	today	he	was
fulfilling	that	wish.	As	a	sudden	warm	gust	caught	the	triangular	red	sail,	the	ship	heaved	beneath	him	and
he	planted	his	feet	wider	apart.	It	was	only	a	little	after	midday	and	the	sea	shone	silver,	almost	too	bright
to	look	upon,	but	he	could	taste	its	saltiness	on	his	lips.
His	 forces	 had	 secured	 all	 the	 major	 towns	 and	 cities	 of	 Bengal,	 and	 even	 though	 they	 had	 not	 yet
captured	Shah	Daud,	that	would	be	only	a	matter	of	time.	Bengal	was	already	his.
That	morning	he	had	received	more	good	news	in	a	despatch	from	Abul	Fazl,	his	chronicler	in	Agra.
The	 western	 part	 of	 his	 empire	 remained	 peaceful	 and	 the	 construction	 of	 Sikri	 was	 proceeding	 apace.
Akbar	smiled	as	he	watched	the	waves.	It	was	as	if	one	part	of	his	reign	was	closing.	He	had	successfully
extended	 his	 empire	 beyond	 his	 grandfather’s,	 his	 father’s	 and	 even	 his	 own	 ambitions.	 Although	 he
would	continue	to	expand	his	territories,	not	least	to	satisfy	his	followers’	desires	for	booty	and	action,
his	main	task	now	would	be	to	consolidate	his	rule	over	his	vast	dominions.	The	empire	he	would	one
day	bequeath	his	heir	must	be	unassailable.	To	do	that	he	knew	he	needed	all	his	subjects	–	new	and	old,
Hindu	or	Muslim	–	to	respect	him	as	their	ruler	rather	than	resent	him	as	a	barbarian	conqueror	or	alien
enemy	of	their	faith.	It	was	easier	to	say	than	to	achieve,	but	he	would	rise	to	this	new	challenge.

Part	III
The	Power	and	the	Glory

Chapter	13

City	of	Victory

o	honour	our	great	victories	in	Bengal	and	Gujarat	for	posterity,	I	rename	this	city	“Fatehpur	Sikri”,
“Sikri,	 City	 of	 Victory”.	 In	 future	 years	 those	 who	 gaze	 on	 its	 high	 red	 sandstone	 walls	 will
remember	the	Moghul	warriors	whose	deeds	it	commemorates.	All	of	you	here	today	have	shared	in
those	deeds.	Your	sons,	your	grandsons	and	the	generations	yet	unborn	will	rejoice	in	the	knowledge	that
your	heroic	blood	runs	through	their	veins	also.’	From	his	carved	balcony	overlooking	the	marble	Anup
Talao	–	the	Peerless	Pool	whose	lotus-strewn	waters	shone	with	a	metallic	brilliance	in	the	late	afternoon
sun	 –	 Akbar,	 equally	 brilliant	 in	 a	 diamond-and-ruby	 encrusted	 cream	 silk	 tunic,	 looked	 down	 on	 the
ranks	of	his	commanders	and	officers	filling	the	great	courtyard,	over	which	vast	canopies	of	green	silk
had	been	erected	to	shade	them.
A	drawn	Muhammad	Beg	was	in	the	front	row,	leaning	heavily	on	a	carved	ebony	stick	that	Akbar	had
sent	him.	Thanks	to	the	hakims	the	old	warrior	was	well	on	the	way	to	recovery,	though	his	wounds	were
so	severe	his	long	years	of	campaigning	were	over.	By	his	side	stood	Ahmed	Khan,	his	long	wispy	beard
for	once	carefully	combed,	the	bulky,	red-turbaned	figure	of	Raja	Ravi	Singh	and	Akbar’s	brother-in-law
Raja	Bhagwan	Das	of	Amber	wearing	diamonds	in	his	ears,	his	favourite	triple-stranded	pearl	necklace
round	his	neck	and	a	close-fitting	orange	silk	coat	with	coral	buttons.	Behind	Akbar’s	senior	commanders
were	 the	 other	 officers,	 positioned	 according	 to	 rank.	 Scanning	 the	 tens	 of	 rows,	 Akbar’s	 sharp	 eyes
picked	out	the	tall,	broad-chested	Ali	Gul,	resplendent	in	robes	of	scarlet	and	gold	brocade	rather	than	his
usual	plain	cotton	or	wool	tunic	and	trousers,	standing	among	his	fellow	Tajiks.	The	Badakhshani	officers
next	to	them	looked	just	as	imposing	in	their	bright	steel	breastplates,	with	their	green	standards	in	their
hands.
As	 the	 voices	 of	 his	 men	 rose	 in	 a	 great	 roar	 of	 approbation,	 their	 faces	 reflected	 the	 pride	 welling
within	Akbar	himself.	Success	was	sweet.	Three	days	ago,	preceded	by	drummers	and	trumpeters	riding
black	 horses	 with	 jewelled	 bridles	 and	 diamond-encrusted	 headguards	 and	 a	 detachment	 of	 horsemen
each	bearing	a	yak’s	tail	standard,	and	riding	aboard	the	tallest	and	most	stately	of	his	war	elephants	in	a
gem-covered	howdah,	he	had	led	his	immaculate,	victorious	armies	into	his	new	capital	of	Sikri	along	a
road	sprinkled	with	rose	and	jasmine	petals	by	attendants	running	ahead.	Every	blade	of	every	weapon
had	been	honed	and	shining,	every	bronze	cannon	polished	and	gleaming,	and	he	had	ordered	the	tusks	of
his	thousand	war	elephants	to	be	painted	gold	to	show	they	were	returning	in	glory	from	battle.
Since	his	return	Akbar	had	been	preparing	his	speech,	seeking	and	memorising	the	words	that	would	do
justice	 to	 what	 he	 hoped	 would	 be	 a	 pivotal	 moment	 in	 his	 reign.	 He	 had	 achieved	 great	 things	 but	 he
wanted	his	men	to	understand	that	an	even	more	glorious	future	awaited	the	Moghul	empire.	Instinctively
he	glanced	at	his	three	sons	standing	to	the	right	of	his	throne.	Since	his	return	he’d	had	little	time	to	spend
with	them	but	he	knew	that	some	time	in	the	future	–	and	he	hoped	it	would	be	long	delayed	–	they	would
be	 the	 dynasty’s	 upholders.	 Seven-year-old	 Salim	 was	 looking	 excited,	 his	 fine-boned	 face	 beneath	 his
green	 silk	 turban	 eager	 and	 vital.	 Six-year-old	 Murad	 was	 also	 clearly	 enjoying	 himself.	 Of	 the	 three
boys,	he	was	the	one	who	had	changed	most	during	Akbar’s	absence.	He	was	now	as	tall	as	Salim.	The

‘T

left	cheek	and	chin	of	his	square	face	was	bruised	–	the	result,	so	his	tutor	had	informed	Akbar,	of	a	fall
from	a	mango	tree	while	looking	for	birds’	eggs.	Little	Daniyal	was	still	plump	and	his	eyes	were	round
as	he	took	in	the	mass	of	men	below.
Akbar	raised	his	hands,	palms	down,	to	signal	he	had	more	to	say	and	the	cheers	subsided.	‘You	have
already	 received	 the	 worldly	 tokens	 of	 my	 esteem	 –	 robes	 of	 honour,	 jewelled	 daggers	 and	 swords,
horses	swift	as	the	wind,	higher	ranks	to	hold,	richer	jagirs	to	govern.	Some	of	you	have	even	received
your	bodyweight	in	gold.	You	have	earned	these	rewards	and	I	promise	you	that	in	the	years	ahead	there
will	be	more.	Who	can	withstand	us?	Only	yesterday,	I	received	news	from	Bengal	that	Shah	Daud,	who
foolishly	challenged	our	Moghul	might,	has	been	captured	and	executed.	Even	now,	his	head,	stuffed	with
straw,	 is	 on	 its	 way	 to	 Fatehpur	 Sikri	 while	 the	 trunk	 of	 his	 traitorous	 body	 is	 being	 nailed	 up	 in	 the
bazaar	in	Bengal’s	chief	city.	Shah	Daud	has	paid	in	blood	for	all	the	death	and	suffering	caused	by	his
treachery.	Had	he	been	loyal	he	would	have	had	nothing	to	fear	from	me.
‘But	that	is	the	past.	Now	our	task	is	to	ensure	that	our	empire	endures.	History	has	taught	us	that	it	is
easier	to	conquer	new	lands	than	to	keep	them.	Nine	dynasties	ruled	Hindustan	before	the	arrival	of	my
grandfather,	Babur,	but	most	were	short-lived.	Through	indolence	and	conceit	those	rulers	let	what	they
had	won	trickle	away	like	sand	through	their	fingers.	We	will	not	make	the	mistakes	that	doomed	them.
With	 your	 help,	 the	 Moghul	 empire	 will	 become	 the	 most	 magnificent	 the	 world	 has	 ever	 seen.	 It	 will
flourish	not	just	because	our	armies	are	fearless	and	strong	but	because	those	who	live	within	its	borders
will	daily	bless	the	fact	that	they	are	its	subjects.
‘I	speak	not	only	of	those	of	my	own	faith	but	of	all	my	people.	Many	Hindu	rulers	–	like	Raja	Ravi
Singh	 who	 I	 see	 before	 me	 –	 fought	 at	 my	 side	 in	 our	 recent	 battles.	 They	 and	 their	 men	 bled	 for	 the
Moghul	cause.	It	is	only	just	that	they	and	loyal	men	of	every	faith	should	find	favour	and	advancement	at
my	court	and	in	my	armies.	It	is	also	right	and	honourable	that	all	should	be	free	to	practise	their	religion
without	hindrance	or	harassment.’
As	he	paused,	Akbar	looked	instinctively	towards	two	dark-robed	Muslim	clerics,	half	hidden	in	the
shade	 of	 a	 covered	 walkway	 to	 one	 side	 of	 the	 Anup	 Talao.	 One	 of	 them	 was	 a	 stout	 elderly	 man,	 his
hands	folded	over	a	belly	round	as	a	melon	and	straining	against	his	black	sash.	Akbar	knew	him	well	–
Shaikh	Ahmad,	an	orthodox	Sunni	and	leader	of	the	ulama,	Akbar’s	senior	spiritual	advisers.	The	shaikh
was	one	of	those	most	opposed	to	Akbar’s	marriages	to	Hindus.	The	second	cleric	was	Abul	Fazl’s	father
Shaikh	Mubarak,	whose	lean,	pockmarked	face	beneath	his	neatly	bound	white	turban	looked	thoughtful.
Akbar	resumed,	voice	resonating	with	renewed	determination.	‘The	Moghul	empire	will	flourish	only
if	all	its	subjects	can	prosper	too.	To	show	I	mean	what	I	say,	I	hereby	declare	an	end	to	the	jizya	–	the
poll	tax	on	non-believers.	Because	a	man	does	not	follow	the	path	of	Islam	is	no	reason	to	impoverish
him.	I	also	abolish	the	ancient	tax	levied	since	before	Moghul	times	on	Hindu	pilgrims	visiting	their	holy
shrines.’
Shaikh	 Ahmad	 was	 openly	 shaking	 his	 head.	 Well,	 let	 him.	 He	 would	 soon	 have	 plenty	 more	 to
disapprove	of.	This	was	only	the	start	of	the	changes	Akbar	was	planning.	On	the	leisurely	journey	back
to	Sikri	he	had	summoned	the	headmen	of	the	towns	and	villages	he	had	passed	and	questioned	them	about
the	 lives	 of	 the	 ordinary	 people.	 Until	 then	 he	 had	 been	 unaware	 of	 the	 oppressive	 taxes	 on	 the	 Hindu
population	 who	 made	 up	 the	 great	 mass	 of	 his	 subjects.	 The	 more	 he	 had	 considered	 the	 question,	 the
more	obvious	it	had	seemed	that	such	taxes	were	not	only	unfair	but	divisive.	To	ensure	the	stability	of	his
empire,	he	had	taken	Hindu	wives	and	allowed	them	freedom	of	worship.	Surely	it	was	wise	–	as	well	as
just	–	to	extend	tolerance	and	equality	to	all?
He	was	becoming	more	curious	about	the	Hindu	religion.	In	the	past,	if	he	had	considered	it	at	all,	it
had	seemed	a	strange,	outlandish,	even	childish	creed	centred	on	idol-worship	and	fanciful	stories.	But

Ravi	 Singh	 had	 presented	 him	 with	 two	 beautifully	 bound	 Hindu	 texts	 –	 the	 Upanishads	 and	 the
Ramayana	 –	 translated	 into	 Persian.	 Each	 night,	 as	 he	 had	 made	 his	 stately	 progress	 back	 towards	 his
capital,	 he	 had	 asked	 his	 attendants	 to	 read	 them	 to	 him.	 Listening	 in	 the	 half-darkness	 he	 had	 begun	 to
divine	beneath	their	rich	language	a	resonating	message	–	that	the	pure	in	heart,	whatever	their	religion	or
race,	could	find	their	way	to	God	and	inner	peace.
He	 realised	 that	 until	 recently	 he’d	 scarcely	 thought	 about	 religion	 at	 all,	 not	 even	 his	 own.	 He
observed	the	outward	practices	of	his	own	faith	because	it	was	expected	of	him.	Yet	the	more	he	listened
to	 the	 wisdom	 in	 the	 Hindu	 books,	 the	 more	 sure	 he	 was	 becoming	 that	 there	 were	 universal	 truths,
principles	common	to	all	religions,	waiting	to	be	revealed	to	all	with	open	minds.	Just	as	the	Sufi	Shaikh
Salim	 Chishti,	 whose	 gentle,	 almost	 mystic	 Islamic	 beliefs	 he	 respected	 so	 much,	 had	 said,	 turning	 his
luminous	eyes	upon	him,	‘God	belongs	to	us	all	.	.	.’
Akbar	rose	and	the	four	trumpeters	standing	behind	him	put	their	lips	to	their	instruments,	announcing
by	 their	 shrill	 blasts	 that	 his	 address	 was	 over.	 Turning,	 Akbar	 stepped	 quickly	 through	 the	 arched
sandstone	 doorway	 leading	 into	 his	 own	 apartments.	 He	 felt	 tired.	 Since	 returning	 from	 campaign	 there
had	 been	 so	 much	 to	 attend	 to	 he	 had	 barely	 slept.	 Hamida	 and	 Gulbadan	 and	 his	 wives	 –	 though	 not
Hirabai	 of	 course	 –	 had	 been	 eager	 to	 hear	 accounts	 of	 his	 triumphs	 and	 to	 tell	 him	 of	 events	 at	 court
during	his	absence.	All	the	time,	though,	his	thoughts	had	been	on	his	new	capital.	He	had	inspected	his
own	quarters	but	was	impatient	to	view	the	rest	of	the	city.	Now	at	last	he	had	the	opportunity.
Half	an	hour	later,	Akbar	was	walking	around	the	city	walls	with	his	chief	architect.	‘You	have	indeed
fulfilled	your	promises	to	me,	Tuhin	Das,’	he	said,	looking	up	at	the	red	sandstone	parapets	and	ramparts
that	girdled	his	new	capital.
‘The	 labourers	 worked	 in	 shifts,	 Majesty.	 There	 was	 not	 an	 hour	 –	 day	 or	 night	 –	 when	 construction
was	not	under	way.’
‘How	did	they	manage	in	the	hours	of	darkness?’
‘We	 lit	 bonfires	 and	 torches.	 Your	 idea	 about	 carving	 pieces	 of	 sandstone	 at	 the	 quarry	 before
transporting	 them	 here	 also	 speeded	 our	 progress.	 Come,	 Majesty.	 If	 we	 enter	 through	 this	 gate	 we	 can
pass	by	the	barracks	and	the	imperial	mint.’
‘The	Hindu	carvers	have	excelled	themselves.’	Akbar	gazed	up	at	the	perfect	geometrical	patterning	of
stars	 and	 hexagons	 on	 a	 sandstone	 ceiling	 in	 the	 mint.	 Indeed,	 wherever	 he	 looked	 it	 was	 almost
impossible	 not	 to	 exclaim	 aloud	 at	 the	 perfection	 and	 detail	 of	 the	 craftsmen’s	 work.	 Chattris	 –	 tiny
pavilions	–	rested	on	sandstone	columns	so	slender	it	seemed	they	might	snap.	Garlands	of	flowers	and
fronds	of	plants,	tender	and	delicate	as	in	life,	curled	round	columns	and	over	walls.
‘And	 look	 at	 this,	 Majesty.’	 Tuhin	 Das	 pointed	 to	 a	 carved	 milk-white	 marble	 jali,	 a	 screen.	 ‘The
craftsmen	are	as	skilled	at	working	the	marble	as	the	sandstone.’	He	was	right,	Akbar	thought.	The	jali
looked	as	shining	and	fragile	as	a	spider’s	web	in	a	frost.	It	reminded	him	of	the	wonders	in	carved	ivory
brought	to	his	court	by	furhatted,	leather-coated	merchants	all	the	way	from	China.
Of	 course,	 for	 all	 its	 perfections	 there	 was	 still	 a	 raw,	 dusty	 newness	 about	 his	 city,	 Akbar	 thought.
Flowers	and	trees	would	soften	the	outlines.	‘How	are	the	plans	for	the	gardens	going?’
‘Excellently,	Majesty.	Over	there,	outside	your	hall	of	private	audience,	the	diwan-i-khas,	we	can	see
some	of	the	gardeners	at	work.’
Akbar	 followed	 Tuhin	 Das	 out	 of	 the	 mint.	 Again,	 his	 chief	 architect	 had	 done	 well,	 he	 thought,
watching	women	as	well	as	men	squatting	on	the	red	earth	as	they	planted	rows	of	dark	green	cypresses	in
between	 young	 cedars.	 In	 another	 bed	 mango	 trees,	 sweet-smelling	 champa	 and	 the	 brilliant	 vermilion
cockscomb	his	father	Humayun	had	admired	so	much	were	already	growing.
‘Please	enter	the	diwan-i-khas,	Majesty.	I	hope	you	will	be	pleased.	It	is	exactly	as	it	appeared	on	the

drawing.’
It	was	indeed,	Akbar	thought	as	he	entered	the	graceful	sandstone	pavilion.	In	the	centre	of	the	single
high	chamber	rose	the	swelling,	miraculously	carved	column	he	had	so	admired	on	paper,	on	which	rested
the	round	platform,	linked	to	hanging	bridges,	where	he	would	sit.	‘See,	Majesty,	you	will	be	positioned
as	 if	 at	 the	 centre	 of	 the	 universe	 .	 .	 .	 the	 place	 of	 supreme	 power.	 It	 is	 like	 the	 pattern	 of	 our	 Hindu
mandalas	–	the	column	represents	the	axis	of	the	world	.	.	.’
Later	that	day,	splashing	his	face	with	chilled	water	from	a	turquoise-inlaid	silver	bowl,	Akbar	felt	a
deep	satisfaction.	His	campaigns	had	succeeded	and	his	capital	was	as	glorious	as	he	had	hoped.	For	the
next	few	hours	–	perhaps	until	the	dawn	light	warmed	the	stony	desert	plains	below	–	he	would	forget
about	conquests	and	empire	and	visit	his	haram.	Of	all	the	buildings	of	Fatehpur	Sikri	that	Tuhin	Das	had
shown	 him,	 the	 complex	 behind	 its	 high	 walls,	 with	 the	 airy	 five-storey	 panch	 mahal	 where	 his
concubines	were	housed	and	the	elegant	and	luxurious	sandstone	palaces	built	for	Hamida,	Gulbadan	and
his	wives,	perhaps	pleased	him	most.
The	 main	 entrance	 into	 the	 haram	 lay	 through	 a	 curved	 sandstone	 archway,	 protected,	 as	 he	 had
ordered,	by	elite	Rajput	guards.	Within	the	complex,	the	women	were	attended	by	eunuchs	–	the	only	men
other	than	Akbar	himself	allowed	inside	it	–	assisted	by	women	from	Turkey	and	Abyssinia,	selected	for
their	physical	strength.	The	overall	running	of	the	haram	was	under	the	watchful	eye	of	the	khawajasara,
to	 whom	 he	 had	 issued	 detailed	 instructions	 for	 its	 smooth	 functioning	 and	 security.	 While	 he	 had	 been
away,	yet	more	rulers	anxious	for	his	favour	had	sent	him	women	to	be	his	concubines	if	they	pleased	him
–	sturdy,	broad-cheekboned,	almond-eyed	women	from	as	far	off	as	Tibet,	slight,	green-eyed	Afghan	girls
with	 skin	 the	 colour	 of	 honey,	 voluptuous,	 large-featured	 women	 from	 Arabia,	 eyes	 rimmed	 with	 kohl,
bodies	made	yet	more	alluring	by	intricate	patternings	of	henna	–	or	so	the	khawajasara	promised	him.
At	 the	 thought	 of	 the	 sensual	 pleasures	 awaiting	 him	 in	 that	 hidden	 world	 behind	 its	 thick,	 metalstudded	 gates,	 Akbar’s	 blood	 quickened.	 This	 new	 haram	 would	 be	 his	 private	 paradise	 –	 a	 luxurious
retreat	 of	 rosewater	 fountains	 and	 silk-hung	 chambers	 where	 he	 could	 shrug	 off	 the	 cares	 of	 being	 an
emperor	and	embrace	the	joys	of	being	a	man.
Whom	would	he	make	love	to	tonight?	he	wondered	as	he	entered	the	torchlit	subterranean	passage	that
was	 his	 private	 entrance	 into	 the	 haram.	 His	 thoughts	 turned	 briefly	 to	 his	 wives.	 It	 would	 not	 be	 the
Persian	nor	the	princess	from	Jaisalmer	.	.	.	not	tonight,	anyway.	As	for	Hirabai,	he	had	kept	his	word	and
they	had	not	made	love	since	Salim’s	birth.	However,	he	had	paid	her	a	courtesy	visit	on	his	return	–	even
presented	 her	 with	 a	 diamond	 bracelet	 that	 had	 once	 graced	 the	 wrist	 of	 one	 of	 Shah	 Daud’s	 wives.
Hirabai’s	tone	had	been	cold,	her	oval	face	expressionless	as	she	had	at	once	handed	his	magnificent	gift
to	one	of	her	Rajput	attendants.	He	shouldn’t	have	been	surprised,	but	her	undiminished	contempt	still	had
the	power	to	wound.
He	 turned	 his	 thoughts	 in	 a	 more	 pleasurable	 direction.	 Perhaps	 he	 would	 order	 the	 khawajasara	 to
select	the	pick	of	the	new	arrivals	and,	after	they	had	removed	their	jewellery	so	its	clinking	would	not
betray	 them,	 he	 would	 play	 a	 game	 of	 hide	 and	 seek	 with	 them.	 The	 woman	 who	 evaded	 him	 longest
would	share	his	bed.	Or	perhaps	he	would	play	a	game	of	living	chess	with	them	on	the	giant	board	he
had	had	laid	out	in	white	and	black	stone	in	the	haram	 courtyard.	 As	 he	 ordered	 each	 woman	 to	 move
around	the	board	in	her	diaphanous	garments,	he	would	have	ample	time	to	decide	which	one	pleased	his
fancy	 most,	 and	 –	 unlike	 Hirabai	 –	 whoever	 he	 preferred	 would	 undoubtedly	 be	 delighted	 to	 be	 the
emperor’s	choice	.	.	.
Six	 weeks	 later,	 Akbar	 entered	 his	 mother’s	 chamber.	 Pale	 pink	 silk	 hangings	 threaded	 with	 pearls

fluttered	 pleasingly	 against	 the	 carved	 sandstone	 walls,	 and	 through	 the	 delicately	 arched	 casement	 he
saw	 water	 bubbling	 from	 a	 fountain	 carved	 like	 a	 narcissus	 in	 the	 courtyard.	 His	 mother	 should	 be
pleased	with	her	accommodation,	he	thought.	A	little	guiltily,	he	realised	how	few	times	he	had	visited
her	recently.
‘What	is	it,	Mother?	Why	did	you	want	to	see	me?’
Hamida	exchanged	a	glance	with	Gulbadan,	seated	beside	her	on	a	gold	brocade	bolster.	‘Akbar,	we
have	something	we	must	say	to	you.	We	feel	imprisoned	in	this	haram	of	yours	behind	its	gates	and	high
walls,	this	city	of	women,	guarded	by	so	many	soldiers	.	.	.’
Akbar	stared	in	surprise.	‘It	is	for	your	own	protection.’
‘Of	course	we	must	be	protected,	but	we	don’t	need	to	be	shut	away	like	prisoners.’
‘Our	royal	women	have	always	lived	in	the	seclusion	of	a	haram.’
‘Not	 isolated	 from	 the	 world	 like	 this.	 You	 forget	 who	 we	 are	 –	 not	 just	 royal	 women	 but	 Moghul
women.	 In	 past	 times,	 we	 accompanied	 our	 warrior	 husbands,	 brothers	 and	 sons	 in	 their	 quest	 for	 new
lands.	 We	 rode	 hundreds	 of	 miles	 on	 mule	 or	 camelback	 between	 makeshift	 encampments	 and	 remote
mud-walled	 settlements.	 We	 ate	 with	 our	 menfolk.	 We	 played	 our	 part	 in	 their	 plans	 –	 as	 advisers,
ambassadors,	mediators.’
‘Yes,’	Gulbadan	broke	in,	‘twice	I	crossed	the	lines	of	battle	to	intercede	with	your	uncles	after	they
had	taken	you	prisoner	.	.	.	I	risked	my	life	like	any	Moghul	warrior	in	the	field	and	I	was	glad	to.’
‘You	 should	 be	 happy	 those	 times	 are	 gone	 .	 .	 .	 that	 we’re	 not	 throneless	 nomads	 any	 more.	 I’m	 a
powerful	ruler	–	an	emperor.	It	would	reflect	on	my	honour	if	I	did	not	free	you	of	such	worldly	worries
and	give	you	every	luxury	and	comfort	and	the	protection	due	to	both	your	sex	and	your	rank.’
‘My	 rank?	 I	 am	 a	 khanim,’	 said	 Gulbadan,	 raising	 her	 chin,	 ‘a	 descendant	 of	 Genghis	 Khan,	 the	 one
they	called	the	Oceanic	Warrior	because	his	lands	once	stretched	from	sea	to	sea.	His	blood	as	well	as
that	of	Timur	flows	in	my	veins	and	gives	me	strength.	I	think	you	have	forgotten	that,	Akbar.’	Her	usually
gentle	voice	was	firm.
‘I	 know	 what	 you	 both	 endured	 because	 I’ve	 often	 heard	 you	 speak	 of	 it	 –	 how	 you	 fled	 through	 icy
mountains	and	across	blistering	deserts,	how	you	almost	starved	to	death.	I	acknowledge	and	honour	your
courage	but	I	thought	you	would	no	longer	wish	to	be	exposed	to	potential	dangers.’
‘Why	didn’t	you	ask	us	first	rather	than	assume	you	knew	what	we	would	want	or	what	was	good	for
us?	We	wish	you	to	treat	us	like	adults	with	adult	minds	–	not	children	to	be	cosseted	and	given	trinkets	to
keep	 us	 amused.	 Not	 all	 of	 us	 are	 content	 to	 be	 like	 your	 concubines,	 compliant,	 pampered	 and
unquestioning.	We	have	lives	of	our	own,’	responded	Hamida.	Rising,	she	came	towards	him	and	placed
her	 hands	 on	 his	 shoulders.	 ‘Yesterday	 I	 wished	 to	 visit	 a	 friend	 of	 mine	 –	 the	 wife	 of	 one	 of	 your
commanders	who	lives	near	the	western	gate.	I	set	out	with	several	of	my	attendants	from	my	palace	but
when	 I	 reached	 the	 gates	 leading	 from	 the	 haram	 the	 guards	 told	 me	 I	 could	 not	 pass	 .	 .	 .	 only	 the
khawajasara	could	give	permission	for	the	gates	to	be	opened.	If	you	think	this	is	for	our	benefit,	for	our
security	and	protection,	you’re	quite	wrong.	It	is	intolerable	to	be	subject	to	such	restrictions.	You	may	be
the	emperor,	Akbar,	but	you	are	also	my	son	and	I	tell	you	I	will	not	be	treated	in	this	way.’
‘I	am	sorry,	Mother,	I	hadn’t	realised	.	.	.	I	will	think	about	how	things	can	be	changed.’
‘No.	You	will	not.	You	will	tell	the	khawajasara	and	the	captain	of	the	guard	and	the	chief	among	that
army	of	eunuchs	you	employ	here	that	I,	the	mother	of	the	emperor,	will	give	the	orders	within	the	haram.
I	 and	 your	 aunt	 will	 come	 and	 go	 as	 we	 please	 without	 let	 or	 hindrance.’	 Hamida	 released	 him.	 ‘And
when	you	go	on	campaign	or	on	an	imperial	progress,	we	will	accompany	you	if	we	wish	to,	properly
concealed	 from	 impertinent	 or	 prying	 eyes,	 of	 course.	 And	 we	 will	 listen	 to	 council	 meetings	 as	 has
always	been	our	custom	from	behind	the	protection	of	the	jali	screens	.	.	.	and	later	give	you	any	advice

we	see	fit.’
Hamida	 paused	 and	 gave	 him	 a	 searching	 look.	 ‘You	 have	 fallen	 in	 love	 with	 your	 power	 and
magnificence	–	you	think	too	much	of	the	image	you	present	to	the	world.	Success	has	come	easily	to	you
–	 far	 more	 easily	 than	 to	 either	 your	 grandfather	 or	 your	 father.	 Don’t	 let	 its	 dazzle	 blind	 you	 to	 the
feelings	 of	 those	 close	 to	 you,	 whether	 female	 or	 male,	 and	 to	 the	 respect	 that	 is	 due	 to	 them	 as
individuals,	not	just	as	elements	in	your	hierarchy	of	empire	.	.	.	to	do	otherwise	will	be	your	loss	as	a
man	and	eventually	as	an	emperor.’
‘You	judge	me	too	harshly.	I	do	respect	you,	Mother	–	and	you	too,	Aunt.	I	know	without	your	help	I
might	never	have	been	emperor	and	I	am	grateful.’
‘Then	 prove	 it	 by	 your	 behavior,	 not	 only	 to	 us	 but	 to	 others	 close	 to	 you,	 like	 your	 sons.	 You	 were
unavoidably	absent	from	them	for	many	months	while	you	were	away	fighting.	Now	you	have	returned	you
should	be	spending	more	time	with	them,	getting	to	know	them	better	rather	than	leaving	them	so	much	to
the	care	of	their	tutors.’
Akbar	nodded	as	if	accepting	her	words,	but	inside	he	felt	resentment	stir.	He	needed	no	advice	on	how
to	govern	or	how	to	behave,	and	even	less	on	how	to	treat	his	sons.
‘Majesty,	the	Christian	priests	you	summoned	here	from	Goa	have	arrived.’
‘Thank	you,	Jauhar,	I	will	come	shortly.’	Akbar	turned	to	Abul	Fazl,	to	whom	he	had	been	dictating	an
account	of	some	new	reforms	to	the	method	of	tax-gathering	within	his	empire.	‘We	will	continue	later.	I
want	the	chronicle	to	be	as	detailed	as	possible.’
‘Indeed,	 Majesty.	 Those	 who	 come	 after	 you	 can	 learn	 many	 lessons	 from	 your	 manifest	 glorious
success	in	every	aspect	of	the	administration	of	your	expanding	empire.’
Akbar	allowed	himself	a	quick	smile.	Over	the	years	since	he	had	appointed	Abul	Fazl	his	chronicler,
he	 had	 grown	 used	 to	 his	 sometimes	 overblown	 and	 florid	 language	 and	 to	 his	 meticulous	 recording	 of
every	aspect	of	court	life.	When,	six	weeks	ago,	he	had	been	gashed	in	the	groin	by	the	antlers	of	a	stag
while	out	hunting,	Abul	Fazl	had	recorded	proudly	that	the	application	of	a	healing	ointment	was	left	‘to
the	 writer	 of	 this	 book	 of	 fortune’.	 But	 he	 had	 come	 to	 realise	 that	 his	 chronicler	 was	 no	 fool.	 Even	 if
Abul	Fazl	wrapped	his	advice	in	formulaic	high-flown	compliments,	unlike	many	of	his	other	courtiers	he
didn’t	just	say	what	he	thought	the	emperor	wanted	to	hear	but	spoke	with	common	sense	and	objectivity,
and	Akbar	had	begun	consulting	him	more	and	more.
‘Come	with	me.	I	want	you	to	see	these	strange	creatures.	I	hear	that	some	of	them	shave	their	skulls
almost	bald,	leaving	just	a	thin	circle	of	hair.’
‘I	will	be	interested	to	observe	them.	According	to	what	I’ve	heard,	their	own	people	treat	them	with
great	reverence	and	indeed	seem	almost	afraid	of	them.	If	I	might	ask,	why	did	you	invite	them	to	your
court,	Majesty?’
‘I	am	curious	about	their	religion.	Unlike	the	faith	of	my	Hindu	subjects,	of	which	I	now	understand	a
little,	 I	 know	 almost	 nothing	 of	 their	 god,	 except	 that	 they	 believe	 he	 was	 once	 a	 man	 who	 after	 being
killed	came	back	to	life.’
‘They	have	only	one	god	then,	like	us?’
‘So	it	would	seem,	except	that	–	as	I	understand	–	they	believe	this	god	has	three	incarnations	–	they
call	them	the	father,	the	son	and	the	holy	ghost.	Perhaps	they	resemble	the	Hindu	trinity	of	Vishnu,	Shiva
and	Brahma.’
Twenty	minutes	later,	diamonds	flashing	in	his	turban,	Akbar	took	his	place	on	the	throne	placed	in	the
balustraded,	pulpit-like	space	at	the	intersection	of	the	four	slender,	diagonal	walkways	supported	by	the

richly-carved	central	column	in	his	diwan-i-khas.	Assembled	below	were	the	members	of	his	council.	He
noticed	Salim	standing	towards	the	back.	It	was	good	that	the	boy	was	here.	He	had	probably	never	seen
Europeans	before.
‘Bring	in	the	visitors,’	Akbar	ordered	the	qorchi	standing	at	his	side.	In	a	few	moments,	to	the	booming
of	drums	from	a	musicians’	gallery,	the	youth	ushered	the	priests	through	a	doorway	that	gave	on	to	one	of
the	balconies	and	out	on	to	one	of	the	walkways	leading	to	where	Akbar	was	sitting.	When	the	two	men,
dark	robes	almost	touching	the	floor,	had	advanced	to	within	a	dozen	feet	of	Akbar,	the	squire	signalled
them	to	halt.	Akbar	saw	that	one	man	was	small	and	sturdily	built	while	the	other	was	taller	and	paler,	the
skin	of	his	bald	head	much	freckled	by	the	sun.
Akbar	motioned	the	interpreter	standing	behind	his	throne	to	step	closer.	‘Tell	them	they	are	welcome
at	 my	 court.’	 However,	 instead	 of	 waiting	 for	 the	 interpreter,	 the	 smaller	 of	 the	 two	 priests	 addressed
Akbar	directly	in	perfect	court	Persian.
‘You	 are	 gracious	 to	 invite	 us	 to	 Fatehpur	 Sikri.	 We	 are	 Jesuit	 priests.	 My	 name	 is	 Father	 Francisco
Henriquez.	I	am	a	Persian	by	birth	and	was	once	a	follower	of	Islam,	though	now	I	am	a	Christian.	My
companion	is	Father	Antonio	Monserrate.’
‘In	your	reply	to	my	letter	of	invitation,	you	spoke	of	truths	you	wished	to	reveal	to	me.	What	are	they?’
Father	Francisco	looked	grave.	‘They	would	take	many	hours	to	explain,	Majesty,	and	you	would	run
out	of	patience.	But	we	have	brought	you	a	gift	–	our	Christian	gospels	written	in	Latin,	the	language	of
our	 church.	 We	 know	 that	 you	 have	 many	 scholars	 at	 your	 court,	 among	 whom	 will	 be	 those	 able	 to
translate	them	for	you.	Perhaps	when	you	have	had	a	chance	to	read	what	is	written	in	our	gospels	we
could	talk	again.’
They	were	well	informed	in	some	respects,	Akbar	thought.	It	was	true	that	he	employed	learned	men	–
some	 to	 translate	 the	 chronicles	 recounting	 the	 deeds	 of	 his	 Timurid	 ancestors	 from	 Turki	 into	 Persian,
others	to	translate	Hindu	volumes	from	their	original	Sanskrit.	However,	what	the	visiting	priests	clearly
didn’t	know	was	that	he	himself	still	couldn’t	read.	Ahmed	Khan	had	tried	to	teach	him	during	the	long,
rain-drenched	hours	sailing	down	the	Jumna	and	the	Ganges	to	fight	Shah	Daud,	and	in	the	year	since	his
return	 Akbar	 had	 tried	 again,	 but	 the	 script	 still	 danced	 before	 his	 eyes.	 Yet	 frustrating	 as	 he	 found	 his
failure,	it	had	only	fed	his	passion	for	books	and	the	wisdom	they	contained.	He	always	had	a	scholar	on
hand	to	read	to	him	and	was	assembling	a	great	library	to	rival	any	of	the	collections	once	held	by	his
ancestors	in	far-off	Samarkand	and	Herat.
‘I	will	have	your	gift	translated,	and	as	soon	as	the	first	pages	are	ready	we	will	talk	again.	I	trust	you
will	remain	guests	at	my	court	until	at	least	that	time,’	he	said	after	a	moment.
‘We	would	be	honoured,	Majesty.	We	intend	to	spare	no	effort	to	shed	the	glorious	light	of	our	Saviour
upon	you.’	As	he	spoke	these	words,	Father	Francisco’s	dark	eyes	gleamed	and	his	whole	face	seemed
possessed	by	a	deep	fervour.	It	would	be	interesting	to	debate	religion	with	a	man	who	had	once	followed
the	 path	 of	 Islam	 but	 turned	 from	 it,	 Akbar	 reflected	 as	 the	 two	 priests	 were	 led	 away,	 and	 also	 to
discover	 what	 these	 so-called	 gospels	 had	 to	 say.	 Father	 Francisco	 had	 made	 them	 sound	 complex	 and
mysterious.	 Would	 they	 really	 reveal	 new	 truths?	 And	 who	 was	 this	 ‘Saviour’?	 Was	 he	 another
incarnation,	like	the	father	or	the	son	or	that	spirit	they	called	the	‘holy	ghost’?	He	felt	impatient	to	know.
He	was	also	curious	to	know	what	Salim	had	made	of	the	new	arrivals.	He	ordered	an	attendant	to	ask
the	prince	to	join	him	in	his	private	apartments,	and	half	an	hour	later	he	was	looking	down	at	his	young
son.	‘I	saw	you	watching	the	Christian	priests.	What	did	you	think	of	them?’
‘They	looked	strange.’
‘In	what	way?	Their	clothes?’
‘Yes,	but	more	than	that	.	.	.	there	was	something	about	their	faces	.	.	.	almost	as	if	they	were	hungry	for

something.’
‘In	a	way	they	are.	They	hope	to	make	Christians	of	us.’
‘I	heard	one	of	our	mullahs	calling	them	foreign	infidels	and	saying	that	you	should	never	have	invited
them.’
‘What	do	you	think?’
Salim	looked	startled.	‘I	don’t	know.’
‘Don’t	you	think	it’s	a	good	idea	to	find	out	as	much	as	possible	about	other	people’s	beliefs?	After	all,
how	can	you	show	people	they	are	wrong	if	you	don’t	know	what	they	think?’
This	time	Salim	said	nothing	at	all,	but	stared	awkwardly	at	the	ground.
‘A	strong,	confident	emperor	doesn’t	need	to	fear	those	who	hold	different	views,	does	he?	Think	about
it,	Salim.	Don’t	your	own	studies	make	you	curious	to	explore	beyond	the	world	you	know?’
Salim	looked	towards	the	door,	obviously	anxious	for	this	interview	to	end,	and	Akbar	felt	a	surge	of
exasperation.	He	had	expected	more	of	his	eldest	son.	Admittedly,	Salim	was	young,	but	surely	when	he’d
been	that	age	he’d	have	had	more	to	say	–	intelligent	questions	to	ask.	‘You	must	have	some	opinion,’	he
persisted.	‘After	all,	why	did	you	come	to	see	the	priests?	I	didn’t	see	your	brothers	there,	only	you.’
‘I	wanted	to	see	what	Christian	priests	look	like	.	.	.	I’ve	heard	all	kinds	of	stories	about	them,	and	one
of	my	tutors	gave	me	this	letter	from	a	man	who	had	met	a	priest	in	Delhi.	It	describes	how	the	Christians
worship	a	man	nailed	to	a	wooden	cross.’	Salim	reached	inside	his	orange	tunic	and	took	out	a	piece	of
folded	paper.	‘There’s	a	drawing	of	the	cross,	but	look	what	the	letter	says,	Father	–	especially	the	last
lines,	about	how	the	Christians	pray.’
Akbar	 stared	 at	 the	 letter	 in	 his	 son’s	 outstretched	 hand.	 Salim	 must	 know	 that	 he	 couldn’t	 read	 .	 .	 .
Slowly	he	took	the	piece	of	paper	and	unfolded	it.	At	the	top	was	a	sketch	of	a	skeletally	thin	man	nailed
to	a	cross,	face	creased	in	agony	and	head	lolling.	Beneath	the	drawing	were	some	densely	written	lines
that	of	course	meant	nothing	to	him.	‘I	will	keep	this	and	look	at	it	later,’	Akbar	said,	unable	to	help	the
sharp	edge	to	his	voice.	‘Leave	me	now.’
Had	his	son	intended	to	discomfit	him?	Akbar	wondered,	pacing	his	apartments	after	Salim	had	gone.
Surely	not.	Why	should	he?	But	then	the	image	of	Hirabai’s	proud,	unyielding	face	came	into	his	mind.
What	if	she	was	encouraging	Salim	to	despise	him,	just	as	she	did?	He	knew	from	questioning	the	boy’s
tutor	that	Salim	was	spending	more	and	more	time	with	his	mother	in	her	silent	sandstone	palace	in	the
haram	complex.	She	never	saw	her	brother	Bhagwan	Das	or	her	nephew	Man	Singh	when	they	came	to
court,	never	held	entertainments	or	gave	parties,	but	–	or	so	he	had	been	told	–	kept	herself	aloof	from	the
haram,	 spending	 her	 time	 reading,	 sewing	 with	 her	 Rajput	 waiting	 women	 and	 worshipping	 her	 gods.
Every	month	at	the	time	of	the	full	moon,	she	climbed	to	the	pavilion	on	the	roof	of	her	palace	to	gaze	into
the	heavens	and	pray.
Perhaps	it	was	simply	her	self-imposed	isolation	from	him	that	was	affecting	Salim,	causing	the	boy	to
start	to	behave	towards	his	father	as	she	did?	Salim	used	to	be	so	free	and	open,	but	not	any	more.	Now
that	Akbar	thought	about	it,	this	wasn’t	the	first	time	he’d	noticed	how	awkward	and	tongue-tied	his	eldest
son	 had	 become	 in	 his	 presence.	 His	 jaw	 hardened.	 Hirabai	 could	 live	 as	 she	 chose	 but	 he	 would	 not
allow	 her	 to	 influence	 their	 son.	 Though	 he	 wouldn’t	 wish	 to	 prevent	 Salim	 from	 seeing	 his	 haughty
mother,	perhaps	he	should	ensure	the	visits	were	short	and	the	pair	were	not	left	unattended.

Chapter	14

Sun	Among	Women

ife	was	good.	Akbar	lay,	eyes	closed,	feeling	the	air	stir	pleasantly	around	his	naked	body	as	a	silk
punkah	 swung	 rhythmically	 back	 and	 forth	 above	 him.	 He	 could	 hear	 the	 sound	 of	 water	 trickling
down	the	tattis,	the	screens	filled	with	the	roots	of	scented	kass	grass	that	in	summer	were	placed	over
the	arched	windows	to	cool	the	hot	dry	desert	air	blowing	through	them.
He	 had	 much	 enjoyed	 the	 past	 hours	 spent	 in	 the	 arms	 of	 a	 dancing	 girl	 from	 Delhi	 whose	 long,
jasmine-scented	hair	fell	to	the	curve	of	her	buttocks.	Although	he	was	in	his	mid-thirties	he	congratulated
himself	he	still	had	the	vigour	of	any	young	blood.	He	certainly	had	no	need	of	the	hakims’	 aphrodisiac
potions	 like	 ‘the	 Making	 of	 the	 Horse’	 –	 a	 dark	 green	 foul-smelling	 concoction	 that	 supposedly	 gave	 a
jaded	 man	 the	 sexual	 energy	 of	 a	 stallion	 and	 according	 to	 haram	 gossip	 was	 favoured	 by	 some	 of	 the
more	elderly	members	of	his	court.	Nevertheless,	he	liked	to	explore	new	paths	to	pleasure.	Sometimes
he	ordered	one	of	his	concubines	to	read	to	him	from	the	centuries-old	Hindu	Kama	Sutra,	marvelling	that
there	 could	 be	 so	 many	 ways	 of	 making	 love.	 He	 smiled	 as	 he	 remembered	 the	 boy	 he	 had	 been	 with
Mayala	all	those	years	ago.	He	would	never	have	imagined	then	that	he	would	acquire	such	a	vast	haram.
But	at	the	thought,	some	of	his	contentment	and	post-coital	languor	ebbed.	Soon	he	must	rise	and	go	to
the	diwan-i-khas	for	a	meeting	with	members	of	the	ulama.	Jauhar	had	warned	him	what	they	wanted	–	to
object	to	his	intention	of	taking	further	wives	because,	having	recently	wed	the	daughter	of	an	important
vassal	 from	 the	 south,	 he	 already	 had	 four,	 the	 maximum	 permitted	 by	 Sunni	 Islam.	 Akbar	 sat	 up.	 He
wouldn’t	 tolerate	 any	 interference.	 Dynastic	 marriages	 were	 the	 cornerstone	 of	 his	 policy	 for	 pacifying
and	extending	his	empire	and	it	was	working.	He	would	take	a	hundred	wives,	two	hundred,	if	it	would
help	 secure	 his	 empire,	 whether	 further	 Rajput	 princesses	 or	 women	 from	 the	 old	 Moghul	 clans	 or
Hindustan’s	Muslim	nobility,	whether	plain	or	beautiful.
Of	course,	it	had	been	very	different	for	his	father.	Humayun	had	found	in	one	woman	–	Hamida	–	the
expression	of	his	heart	and	soul.	Sometimes	he	wished	he	himself	could	feel	the	same	intense	love	for	one
woman	but	it	had	never	happened	and	perhaps	never	would.	At	least	it	made	it	easier	for	him	to	pursue
his	policy	of	strategic	alliances	and	left	him	free	to	enjoy	an	infinite	variety	of	sexual	partners.	He	now
had	over	three	hundred	concubines.	Most	men	would	envy	him,	he	reflected,	pushing	thoughts	of	the	sourfaced	 ulama	 from	 his	 mind	 as	 he	 recalled	 once	 more	 the	 dancing	 girl,	 supple	 body	 gleaming	 with
perfumed	oil.
Two	hours	later,	in	robes	of	emerald	silk	embroidered	with	peacocks	and	with	a	jewelled	ceremonial
dagger	tucked	into	his	bright	yellow	sash,	Akbar	took	his	place	on	his	throne	on	the	circular	platform	atop
the	 tall	 carved	 pillar	 in	 the	 diwan-i-khas,	 Abul	 Fazl	 and	 the	 now	 stooped	 figure	 of	 his	 vizier	 Jauhar
behind	him.	On	one	of	the	balconies	stood	the	members	of	his	ulama.	Shaikh	Ahmad	was	standing	slightly
to	the	fore,	obviously	expecting	to	be	invited	to	advance	along	the	narrow	bridge	to	the	platform.	Akbar
gestured	to	him	to	remain	where	he	was.
‘Well,	Shaikh	Ahmad.	What	do	you	wish	to	say	to	me?’
The	shaikh	touched	his	hand	to	his	breast	but	the	small	brown	eyes	he	fixed	on	Akbar	were	far	from

L

humble.	‘Majesty,	the	time	has	come	for	plain	speaking.	Your	intention	to	take	further	wives	is	an	affront
to	God.’
Akbar	leaned	forward.	‘Be	careful	what	you	say.’
‘You	are	defying	what	is	written	in	the	Koran.	I	have	spoken	to	you	about	this	many	times	in	private	but
you	have	chosen	not	to	listen,	forcing	me	to	protest	in	public.	If	you	still	will	not	heed	me,	I	will	preach
my	message	from	the	pulpit	of	the	great	mosque	at	Friday	prayers.’	The	shaikh’s	face	was	flushed	and	he
seemed	 to	 interpret	 Akbar’s	 silence	 as	 encouraging.	 Drawing	 up	 his	 portly	 body	 and	 with	 a	 triumphant
glance	over	his	shoulder	at	his	colleagues,	he	continued,	‘The	Koran	permits	a	man	only	four	marriages	–
nikah	marriages	with	women	of	the	Muslim	faith.	Yet	I	hear	that	you	plan	to	take	many	more	–	some	not
even	Muslims.	If	you	do	not	draw	back,	God	will	punish	you	and	our	empire.’
‘I	already	have	two	Hindu	wives,	as	you	very	well	know.	Each	has	borne	me	a	son.	Are	you	suggesting
I	renounce	them?’
The	shaikh	thrust	out	his	chin.	‘Let	them	be	concubines,	Majesty.	Your	royal	sons	will	still	enjoy	the
status	of	royal	princes.	Many	princes	have	been	born	to	concubines	.	.	.	your	own	grandfather’s	brother,
for	example	.	.	.’
Akbar	looked	at	the	mullah,	wondering	how	it	would	feel	to	take	his	sword	and	slice	through	that	fleshy
neck.	The	thought	came	that	even	after	being	severed,	that	pompous,	self-righteous	head	would	probably
still	keep	talking.
‘Shaikh	Ahmad,	I	have	done	you	the	courtesy	of	listening	to	you.	Now	listen	to	me.	I	am	the	emperor.	I
alone	will	decide	what	is	best	for	my	empire	and	for	my	people.	I	will	not	tolerate	your	meddling.’
The	mullah	flushed	but	said	nothing.	Akbar	was	about	to	dismiss	the	ulama	 when	 Abul	 Fazl’s	 father
Shaikh	Mubarak	stepped	forward.	Akbar	hadn’t	noticed	him	till	now.
‘Majesty,	if	I	might	be	permitted	to	speak,	I	might	be	able	to	propose	a	solution.’
‘Very	well.’
‘Like	Shaikh	Ahmad,	I	am	a	Sunni	Muslim,	but	I	have	spent	some	years	studying	the	ways	of	our	Shia
brothers.	I	have	come	to	see	that	they	–	like	us	–	are	faithful	followers	of	the	Prophet	Muhammad	and	that
we	should	not	allow	doctrinal	differences	to	make	us	enemies.’
‘You	speak	wisely,	but	why	is	this	relevant	to	what	you	have	just	heard?’
‘It	could	not	be	more	relevant,	Majesty.	The	Shias	believe	that	the	Koran	permits	another,	lesser	form
of	marriage	–	the	muta.	A	man	may	contract	a	muta	marriage	with	any	number	of	women,	whatever	their
religion,	and	with	no	need	for	any	formal	ceremony	.	.	.’
‘That	is	heresy	.	.	.	no	true	believer	would	follow	such	a	path,’	interrupted	Shaikh	Ahmad,	shaking	his
head	angrily.
‘Perhaps	it	isn’t	heresy.	A	particular	verse	of	the	Koran	–	I	will	show	it	to	you	–	appears	to	sanction
these	muta	marriages.	They	are	common	in	Persia	.	.	.’
‘Yes,	and	the	corrupt	practices	of	that	sacrilegious	land	are	spreading	to	our	own.	I	have	heard	that	the
owners	 of	 our	 caravanserais	 now	 offer	 muta	 wives	 to	 merchants	 for	 the	 night	 as	 an	 inducement	 to	 stay
there.	It	is	no	more	than	an	excuse	for	prostitution!’
Shaikh	Ahmad	continued	to	rage	on	but	Akbar	was	no	longer	listening.	Shaikh	Mubarak’s	ideas	were
interesting	and	he	would	like	to	know	more.	If	the	Koran	indeed	appeared	to	allow	a	man	many	wives,	it
would	be	useful	in	countering	the	views	of	the	orthodox	members	of	the	ulama	–	not	that	he	would	have
allowed	them	to	frustrate	his	plans.	But	Mubarak’s	words	had	struck	a	deeper	chord	within	him.	Shias,
Sunnis,	 Hindus,	 Christians	 –	 weren’t	 they	 all	 seeking	 the	 same	 fundamental	 truths	 –	 certainties	 in	 an
uncertain	world?	The	rituals	they	enacted,	the	rules	they	followed,	were	all	man-made.	Strip	all	this	away
and	what	was	left	but	man’s	simple	quest	to	communicate	with	his	god	and	live	the	best	life	he	could?

Suddenly	 aware	 that	 Shaikh	 Ahmad	 had	 stopped	 ranting	 and	 that	 all	 were	 waiting	 for	 him	 to	 speak,
Akbar	raised	a	hand.	‘You	are	dismissed.	I	will	think	over	what	I	have	heard.	Shaikh	Mubarak	–	you	will
come	 to	 me	 tomorrow	 and	 we	 will	 speak	 further.	 But	 let	 this	 be	 understood.	 I	 am	 the	 emperor	 and,	 as
such,	God’s	shadow	upon	the	earth.	I	alone	will	decide	how	to	conduct	my	life.	I	will	not	tolerate	any
interference	and	need	no	sanction	from	anyone	for	what	I	decide.’
The	 members	 of	 the	 ulama	 backed	 away.	 Akbar	 sat	 for	 a	 while,	 caught	 up	 in	 his	 musings,	 but	 after
several	minutes	Jauhar	whispered	to	him,	‘Majesty,	a	stranger	has	arrived	at	court	–	by	coincidence	from
the	very	country	of	which	we	have	just	been	speaking,	Persia.	He	begs	an	audience	with	you.’	Akbar	was
about	to	say	that	his	patience	was	exhausted	and	he	had	no	wish	to	see	the	man	when	Jauhar	added,	‘He
has	an	interesting	story,	Majesty,	and	he	is	no	common	traveller.’
Akbar	 thought	 for	 a	 moment.	 He	 felt	 like	 going	 riding.	 A	 gallop	 across	 the	 desert	 would	 ease	 his
frustration,	but	it	was	still	too	hot	for	that.	‘Very	well,	admit	him.’
Ten	minutes	later	a	tall,	thin	man	was	led	on	to	one	of	the	balconies.	His	dark	purple	robes	hung	from
his	emaciated	body	and	his	fingers	were	ringless.
‘You	may	approach.	Who	are	you?’
‘My	name	is	Ghiyas	Beg.	I	am	a	Persian	nobleman	from	Khurasan.	My	father	was	a	courtier	of	the	shah
and	my	family	are	connected	with	the	Persian	royal	family	through	marriage.’
‘What	brings	you	to	my	court?’
‘A	terrible	blight	fell	upon	my	estates.	The	crops	withered,	my	debts	mounted	and	I	and	my	family	were
reduced	 to	 poverty.	 I	 had	 heard	 of	 the	 many	 Persians	 who	 had	 come	 to	 Fatehpur	 Sikri	 and	 found	 great
favour	 here.	 I	 therefore	 determined	 to	 bring	 my	 family	 into	 Hindustan	 and	 to	 offer	 you	 my	 services.’
Ghiyas	Beg	paused	and	for	a	moment	rubbed	his	hand	over	eyes	beneath	which	were	shadows	so	dark	the
skin	appeared	bruised.	His	voice	was	deep	and	musical	and	he	spoke	court	Persian	with	the	grace	of	the
courtier	 he	 claimed	 to	 be.	 Though	 clearly	 destitute,	 his	 bearing	 was	 that	 of	 a	 man	 more	 used	 to
commanding	than	seeking	favours.	Akbar	looked	at	him	with	growing	interest.
‘Majesty,	though	I	appear	before	you	like	a	beggar,	it	was	the	perils	of	my	journey	that	reduced	me	to
this	state.	The	only	reason	that	I	am	not	dressed	in	rags	is	that	a	Persian	friend	–	one	of	the	scholars	in
your	library	–	gave	me	clean	robes.	Your	inclination	must	be	to	order	the	poor	creature	that	I	have	become
from	your	sight,	but	I	beg	you	first	to	hear	my	story.’
‘Very	well.’
‘I	 brought	 my	 wife	 –	 who	 was	 well	 advanced	 in	 pregnancy	 –	 and	 my	 young	 son	 Asaf	 Khan	 safely
across	 the	 Helmand	 river	 out	 of	 Persia.	 It	 was	 then	 that	 our	 troubles	 began.	 The	 road	 to	 Hindustan	 lay
through	wild,	lonely	and	mountainous	country.’
‘I	know.	My	father	once	hazarded	his	life	by	taking	that	path.	How	did	you	survive?’
‘To	protect	my	family	I	joined	a	large	caravan,	but	because	of	my	wife’s	fragile	condition	and	the	poor
quality	of	the	mules	carrying	us,	we	fell	behind.	One	night	towards	dusk	as	we	descended	a	narrow	pass,
bandits	swept	down	the	steep	scree	slopes	and	attacked	us.	They	took	everything	we	had	except	for	the
old	mule	on	which	my	wife	was	riding,	which	they	left	us,	as	they	said,	“for	charity’s	sake”.	We	struggled
on,	desperate	to	catch	up	with	the	caravan,	but	darkness	fell	and	we	were	forced	to	stop	for	the	night	in
the	lee	of	a	hill	which	gave	us	some	protection	from	the	weather.	It	was	late	autumn	and	a	chill,	scouring
wind	was	already	blowing	down	from	the	mountains.	That	night	–	perhaps	brought	on	by	the	shock	of	the
attack	–	my	wife	gave	birth	to	a	daughter.’
‘So	after	all	your	sufferings,	God	was	kind	.	.	.’
Ghiyas	Beg’s	bony	face	remained	grave.	‘In	our	joy,	we	called	her	Mehrunissa,	“Sun	Among	Women”,
because	the	moment	of	her	birth	had	brought	light	into	the	darkness	of	our	lives.	But	our	happiness	was

short-lived.	Next	morning,	in	the	cold	dawn	light	I	was	forced	to	confront	our	situation.	We	were	starving,
destitute	and	alone	–	we	could	not	keep	the	child.	I	took	Mehrunissa	from	the	arms	of	my	exhausted	wife,
who	was	barely	conscious,	and	laid	her	in	a	crevice	among	the	roots	of	a	tall	fir	tree.	I	prayed	she	would
die	of	exposure	before	jackals	or	some	other	wild	creatures	found	her.	I	was	even	tempted	–	I	confess	it	–
to	smother	her	myself,	but	that	would	have	been	too	great	a	sin.	I	walked	slowly	away,	my	daughter’s	thin
wails	echoing	in	my	ears,	indeed	in	my	very	soul.’
Ghiyas	Beg	fell	silent	for	a	moment,	as	if	reliving	that	most	terrible	of	dilemmas.	Akbar	could	picture
the	distraught	father	buffeted	by	freezing	winds,	seeing	nothing	but	death	and	hopelessness	ahead.	Could
he	 himself	 have	 abandoned	 one	 of	 his	 sons	 in	 such	 circumstances?	 As	 if	 the	 thought	 of	 his	 boys	 had
somehow	 conjured	 one	 to	 appear,	 Akbar	 suddenly	 noticed	 Salim	 standing	 half	 concealed	 behind	 a
sandstone	pillar	in	the	chamber	below,	listening	intently.
‘Continue,	Ghiyas	Beg,’	he	said.
An	unexpected	smile	softened	the	Persian’s	face.	‘It	is	not	for	us	mortals	to	know	the	ways	of	God,	but
for	some	reason	he	took	pity	on	me.	A	Persian	merchant	to	whom	I	had	been	talking	–	he	was	also	from
Khurasan	–	had	noticed	our	absence	when	the	caravan	halted	for	the	night.	He	knew	my	wife’s	condition
and	guessed	her	time	might	have	come.	At	first	light,	he	and	two	of	his	servants	came	back	to	look	for	us.
By	a	miracle	he	came	across	us	as	we	were	attempting	to	ford	a	stream.
‘When	 I	 told	 him	 about	 my	 daughter,	 he	 at	 once	 offered	 me	 one	 of	 his	 attendants’	 horses.	 I	 galloped
back	–	in	truth	we	had	not	managed	to	get	far	–	praying	that	Mehrunissa	would	still	be	alive.	When	I	heard
her	cries	above	the	wind	I	knew	my	plea	had	been	answered.	She	was	unharmed	but	very	cold,	her	lips
almost	blue.	I	took	the	sheepskin	saddlecloth	of	the	horse	and	wrapped	her	in	it.	After	a	while,	I	saw	the
colour	returning	to	her	tiny	face	and	from	that	moment	hope	was	restored	to	me.
‘The	 merchant	 who	 had	 helped	 us	 remained	 our	 friend,	 indeed	 our	 benefactor,	 giving	 us	 food	 and
allowing	us	to	ride	in	one	of	his	bullock	carts	until	four	days	ago	we	saw	your	great	city	of	Fatehpur	Sikri
rising	 up	 before	 us	 and	 our	 hearts	 filled	 with	 joy.	 But	 I	 have	 taken	 enough	 of	 your	 time,	 Majesty.	 If	 it
pleases	you	to	find	some	humble	task	about	your	court,	you	will	find	me	a	devoted	and	grateful	servant.’
Akbar	 scrutinised	 the	 tall,	 shabby	 figure	 before	 him.	 He	 didn’t	 doubt	 the	 Persian’s	 story	 of	 the
hardships	and	dangers	he	had	encountered.	The	man	had	looked	truly	harrowed	as	he	had	spoken	of	them.
On	the	other	hand,	was	this	courtly,	silver-tongued	man	all	he	claimed	to	be?	Why	had	Ghiyas	Beg	set	out
with	 a	 young	 child	 and	 a	 pregnant	 wife	 on	 what	 he	 must	 have	 known	 would	 be	 a	 highly	 dangerous
journey?	The	desire	to	escape	poverty,	the	hopes	of	a	new	life	that	he	had	spoken	of	so	eloquently	might
not	be	true.	Maybe	something	else	–	corruption	or	rebellion	–	had	forced	him	to	flee	.	.	.
As	 if	 sensing	 his	 doubts,	 Ghiyas	 Beg	 seemed	 to	 sag	 a	 little.	 That	 tiny,	 despairing	 gesture	 decided
Akbar.	He	would	give	the	Persian	the	benefit	of	the	doubt.	After	all,	an	emperor	should	be	generous,	and
he	had	thought	of	somewhere	he	could	send	him	–	a	place	where,	if	he	was	as	industrious	as	he	claimed,
he	could	be	useful,	and	if	he	was	dishonest	or	treacherous	his	crime	would	soon	be	discovered.
‘Ghiyas	Beg,	the	story	you	have	related	with	such	candour	has	touched	me.	I	believe	you	are	a	man	of
courage	and	honesty	deserving	of	my	favour.	Jauhar	.	.	.’	Akbar	gestured	to	his	elderly	vizier.	‘A	few	days
ago	you	told	me	that	one	of	my	assistant	treasurers	in	Kabul	had	recently	died,	didn’t	you?’
‘Yes,	Majesty,	of	the	spotted	fever.’
‘Will	 you	 take	 the	 post,	 Ghiyas	 Beg?	 Prove	 your	 skill	 and	 industry	 and	 it	 may	 lead	 to	 more	 senior
appointments.’
Ghiyas	 Beg	 looked	 transfigured	 with	 relief.	 ‘I	 will	 serve	 you	 in	 Kabul	 to	 the	 utmost	 of	 my	 ability,
Majesty.’
‘See	that	you	do.’

As	the	Persian	was	ushered	out,	Akbar	motioned	to	Jauhar	to	come	closer.	‘Write	to	my	governor	in
Kabul	about	this	appointment	and	tell	him	to	keep	an	eye	on	Ghiyas	Beg,	just	to	be	sure.’	Then	he	looked
for	 his	 son,	 but	 was	 not	 surprised	 to	 find	 that	 Salim	 had	 slipped	 away.	 Ever	 since	 the	 day	 he	 had
questioned	 him	 about	 the	 Jesuit	 visitors,	 he	 had	 noticed	 how	 his	 son	 was	 avoiding	 him.	 Whenever	 he
made	an	effort	to	seek	him	out	–	going	to	watch	him	at	his	lessons	or	practising	swordplay,	archery	or
wrestling	–	instead	of	relishing	the	chance	to	show	off	his	skills	Salim	seemed	awkward	and	nervous.	His
obvious	unease	was	making	it	increasingly	difficult	for	Akbar	to	know	what	to	do	or	say.	Emperor	himself
from	 a	 young	 age,	 he	 had	 always	 taken	 the	 love	 and	 admiration	 of	 those	 around	 him	 for	 granted.	 How
should	he	react	to	his	son’s	behaviour?
He	must	learn	patience.	If	he	just	waited,	Salim	would	surely	start	coming	to	him	of	his	own	accord,
whatever	insidious	things	his	mother	might	have	told	him,	might	tell	him	.	.	.	Boys	needed	their	fathers.
‘I	am	curious.	What	did	this	man	Ghiyas	Beg	look	like?’	asked	Hamida.
‘He	was	tall	and	thin	and	the	robe	he	was	wearing	was	too	small	for	him.	His	big,	bony	wrists	were
sticking	out,’	Salim	replied.
‘And	he	is	a	Persian?’
‘Yes.’
‘Why	has	he	come	here?’
‘To	seek	my	father’s	help.’
‘What	did	he	ask	for?’
‘Employment	in	the	service	of	the	Moghuls.’
‘Tell	me	exactly	what	he	said.’
Hamida	listened	intently,	and	when	Salim	had	finished	was	silent	for	a	while.	‘Life	is	a	strange	thing,’
she	 said	 at	 last.	 ‘So	 much	 that	 happens	 to	 us	 appears	 random,	 yet	 –	 like	 your	 grandfather,	 my	 husband
Humayun	 –	 I	 have	 often	 discerned	 patterns	 running	 through	 our	 existence	 as	 if	 at	 the	 hand	 of	 a	 divine
weaver	at	the	loom	.	.	.	You	know	that	a	seer’s	blood	runs	in	my	veins.	I	thought	that	the	power	to	see	into
the	future	had	left	me	long	ago,	but	while	you	were	speaking	I	suddenly	thought	that	one	day	this	Ghiyas
Beg	 might	 become	 important	 to	 our	 dynasty.	 There	 are	 strange	 parallels	 between	 his	 story	 and	 some	 of
what	previously	befell	our	own	family	.	.	.	You	say	that	he	has	come	from	Persia	with	his	fortunes	in	the
dust	after	nearly	abandoning	his	newborn	child.	As	you	know,	a	similar	desperate	plight	once	forced	your
grandfather	and	me	to	go	to	Persia	to	seek	the	shah’s	help.	We	too	were	nearly	destitute.	But	far	worse
than	that,	your	father,	then	just	a	baby,	had	been	stolen	from	us.
‘Picture	the	scene	when	we	crossed	into	Persia	.	.	.	We	had	barely	eaten	for	weeks	and	had	no	idea
whether	Shah	Tahmasp	would	even	let	us	remain	in	his	kingdom.	But	when	he	learned	of	our	arrival	he
sent	 ten	 thousand	 cavalrymen	 to	 escort	 us	 to	 his	 summer	 capital.	 Servants	 dressed	 in	 purple	 silk
embroidered	 with	 gold	 walked	 ahead	 of	 us	 sprinkling	 the	 road	 with	 rosewater	 to	 keep	 the	 dust	 from
rising.	At	night	we	slept	in	brocade	tents	on	satin	couches	scented	with	ambergris,	and	attendants	served
us	over	five	hundred	different	dishes	as	well	as	delicate	sherbets	chilled	with	ice	brought	down	from	the
mountains	 and	 sweetmeats	 wrapped	 in	 gold	 and	 silver	 leaf.	 After	 every	 meal,	 we	 were	 presented	 with
some	 fresh	 gift	 –	 singing	 birds	 with	 jewelled	 collars	 in	 cages	 of	 solid	 gold,	 an	 image	 of	 Timur	 in	 his
summer	 palace	 in	 Samarkand	 painted	 on	 ivory	 that	 I	 still	 possess.	 But	 though	 we	 wanted	 the	 shah’s
assistance,	 we	 refused	 to	 behave	 like	 suppliants.	 Your	 grandfather	 made	 him	 a	 great	 gift	 –	 greater	 than
anything	ever	presented	to	him	before.	It	was	the	Koh-i-Nur	diamond,	the	“Mountain	of	Light”.’
‘Why	did	my	grandfather	give	the	diamond	to	the	Shah?’

Hamida	smiled,	a	little	sadly,	or	so	it	seemed	to	Salim.	‘You	must	understand	how	it	was.	Indeed,	it’s	a
good	lesson	for	you.	Think	how	hard	it	was	for	him	to	throw	himself	on	another	ruler’s	mercy.	By	offering
the	 shah	 the	 Koh-i-Nur	 diamond	 he	 redressed	 the	 balance,	 showing	 himself	 the	 shah’s	 equal,	 even	 if	 in
desperate	 straits,	 and	 thus	 retained	 his	 pride.	 What	 is	 a	 gem,	 however	 magnificent,	 compared	 with	 the
honour	of	our	dynasty?’	Hamida’s	eyes	were	suddenly	very	bright.
While	she	had	been	speaking,	Gulbadan	had	entered.	Though	the	lines	running	from	the	corners	of	her
mouth	to	her	jawline	gave	her	a	severe	look,	it	vanished	when	she	saw	Salim,	to	be	replaced	by	a	warm
smile.
Salim	 smiled	 back.	 He	 liked	 to	 visit	 his	 grandmother	 and	 his	 great-aunt.	 With	 them	 he	 felt	 safe	 and
secure.	They	didn’t	criticise	him,	and	he	enjoyed	their	stories.	When	they	spoke	of	how	his	grandfather
had	won	back	Hindustan,	he	could	see	the	pennants	fluttering	from	the	steel-tipped	lances	of	the	Moghul
horsemen	 as	 they	 galloped	 across	 the	 flat,	 dusty	 plains	 and	 the	 clouds	 of	 white	 smoke	 rising	 from	 the
Moghul	cannon.	He	could	smell	the	acrid	fumes	and	hear	the	crackle	of	musket	fire	and	the	deep,	harsh
trumpeting	of	war	elephants.
‘Tell	your	great-aunt	about	the	Persian	who	has	arrived	at	court.’
‘Did	your	father	agree	to	help	this	Ghiyas	Beg?’	Gulbadan	asked	when	Salim	had	finished.
‘Yes.	He	gave	him	a	post	in	Kabul.’
‘Your	father	is	a	good	judge	of	character,’	Gulbadan	said,	‘but	it	wasn’t	always	so.	As	a	young	man	he
could	 be	 rash	 and	 too	 easily	 influenced	 by	 those	 around	 him.	 But	 he	 has	 learned	 to	 be	 more	 careful.
Observe	him,	Salim.	Ask	him	the	reasons	behind	his	decisions	.	.	.	try	to	learn	from	him.’
That	was	easy	for	her	to	say,	Salim	thought.	But	what	he	said	was,	‘I	often	go	to	the	audience	chamber
and	watch	my	father	seated	on	his	throne	on	top	of	the	carved	column.	But	it	puzzles	me	how	anyone	dares
to	approach	him.	He	looks	so	remote	–	almost	godlike	.	.	.’
‘It	 is	 a	 ruler’s	 duty	 to	 inspire	 confidence,	 to	 show	 that	 he	 is	 ready	 to	 listen,’	 said	 Hamida.	 ‘People
approach	him	because	they	trust	him,	as	you	should.’
‘Your	grandmother	is	right,’	said	Gulbadan.	‘A	ruler	must	demonstrate	to	his	people	that	he	cares	for
them.	That’s	why	every	day	at	dawn	your	father	steps	out	on	to	the	jharoka	balcony	to	show	himself	to	his
subjects.	It	is	to	prove	to	them	not	just	that	their	emperor	still	lives	but	also	that	he	is	concerned	for	them,
watching	over	them	like	a	father	.	.	.’
He	actually	is	my	father,	Salim	thought,	so	why	do	I	find	it	so	hard	to	talk	to	him?	Every	time	he	was
with	Akbar	it	seemed	to	him	that	his	father	was	examining	and	probing	him,	critically	testing	his	merits
and	his	knowledge.
‘Salim,	what’s	the	matter?	You	look	sad,’	said	Hamida.
‘You	tell	me	to	talk	to	my	father	but	it’s	hard	.	.	.	I	don’t	know	whether	he’d	welcome	it.	He	always
seems	so	immaculate,	so	perfect	in	dress	and	behaviour,	and	so	busy,	surrounded	by	his	courtiers	and	his
commanders.	Sometimes	he	does	come	to	watch	me	at	my	studies	but	when	he	asks	me	questions	I	feel
confused	.	.	.	stupid	.	.	.	so	worried	that	what	I	say	won’t	be	good	enough	that	I	can’t	answer	at	all.	I	know
I	disappoint	him.’
‘Is	that	all?’	Hamida	was	smiling.	‘Don’t	be	so	foolish.	Remember	your	father	is	my	son.	He	was	not
always	this	imposing	presence.	He	was	once	a	boy	like	you,	grazing	his	knees	and	tearing	his	clothes	in
rough	games	and	exercises	with	his	companions	and	–	if	the	truth	be	told	–	not	half	so	good	at	his	lessons
or	curious	about	the	world	around	him	as	you	are!	And	I	know	how	proud	he	is	of	you.	You	should	feel
inferior	to	no	one!’
Salim	smiled	back	but	said	nothing.	How	could	they	understand?	How	could	anybody,	when	he	didn’t
understand	his	feelings	himself?

‘I	am	pleased	to	see	you,	Salim.	Come	with	me	up	to	the	roof.	I	was	about	to	pray.’
Salim	followed	his	mother	up	the	winding	flight	of	sandstone	stairs.	The	light	from	the	clay	oil	lamp	in
Hirabai’s	right	hand	was	just	enough	for	him	to	see	where	he	was	going,	though	once	he	turned	a	corner
too	sharply	and	tripped.	Stepping	out	on	to	the	flat	roof	of	her	palace	he	saw	that	his	mother,	long	dark
hair	intertwined	with	white	jasmine	flowers,	was	already	kneeling	before	a	small	shrine.	It	was	a	warm,
windless	evening	and	glancing	up	into	the	heavens	Salim	saw	the	pale	sliver	of	the	crescent	moon.
Hirabai	 was	 bending	 low	 in	 prayer.	 Although	 she	 sometimes	 spoke	 of	 her	 Hindu	 beliefs,	 they	 still
seemed	strange	to	him,	raised	a	Muslim	believing	in	one	God	and	unused	to	idols	and	images.	At	last	she
was	finished,	and	rising	she	turned	to	Salim.	‘Look	at	the	moon.	We	Rajputs	are	its	children	by	night	and
the	offspring	of	the	sun	by	day.	The	moon	gives	us	our	limitless	endurance	and	the	sun	our	indomitable
courage.’	Hirabai’s	dark	eyes	flickered	as	she	looked	at	him.	Salim	could	feel	the	intensity	of	her	love	for
him	and	wished	she	would	embrace	him,	but	that	was	not	her	way	and	her	arms	remained	by	her	sides.
‘Mother,	 you	 always	 talk	 about	 the	 Rajputs,	 but	 I’m	 a	 Moghul	 too,	 aren’t	 I?’	 Salim	 had	 come	 to	 his
mother	hoping	that	perhaps	she	might	help	him	understand	the	confusions	and	uncertainties	that	seemed	to
be	crowding	in	around	him.	And	he	had	come	alone,	slipping	away	from	the	attendants	who,	he	suspected,
were	under	orders	to	report	what	they	saw	and	heard	to	Akbar.
‘To	my	great	sorrow	you	have	been	brought	up	as	a	Moghul	prince.	Your	tutors	have	stuffed	your	ears
with	 tales	 of	 the	 valour	 of	 your	 great-grandfather	 Babur	 and	 of	 your	 grandfather	 Humayun	 –	 how	 they
crossed	the	Indus	river	and	conquered	an	empire.’
‘But	my	father	is	the	Moghul	Emperor	of	Hindustan.	Surely	I	need	to	know	the	history	of	his	people?’
‘Of	 course.	 But	 you	 also	 need	 to	 be	 told	 the	 truth.	 Your	 tutors	 praise	 the	 bravery	 and	 daring	 of	 the
Moghul	clans	but	never	say	that	they	stole	from	the	Rajputs	what	was	rightfully	theirs.’
‘What	do	you	mean?’
‘You	have	been	brought	up	by	your	father	to	believe	this	land	is	yours	–	but	he	is	deceiving	you	just	as
through	blind	pride	and	arrogance	he	deceives	himself.	The	truth	is	that	Moghuls	are	no	more	than	cattle
thieves	 who	 sneak	 among	 the	 herds	 at	 night	 to	 steal	 the	 property	 of	 others.	 They	 took	 advantage	 of	 a
moment	of	weakness	in	Hindustan	to	invade.	They	claimed	that	Timur’s	conquest	of	Hindustan	gave	them
the	right	to	rule,	but	who	was	he	but	another	uncouth	barbarian	raider	from	the	north?
‘It	is	my	people,	the	Rajputs	–	your	people	too,	Salim	–	who	are	the	true,	indeed	the	sacred	rulers	of
Hindustan.	 Just	 before	 Babur	 and	 his	 hordes	 poured	 down	 into	 our	 land	 from	 their	 mountainous
wildernesses,	the	Rajput	kings	under	Rana	Sanga	of	Chittorgarh	were	forming	an	alliance	to	depose	the
weak,	 luxury-loving	 Lodi	 rulers	 and	 take	 Hindustan	 back	 for	 our	 people.	 Perhaps	 we	 had	 angered	 the
gods	and	the	Moghul	invaders	were	our	punishment,	but	we	have	paid	in	blood	for	any	offence	we	gave.
‘Even	 after	 the	 Moghuls	 defeated	 the	 Lodi	 dynasty	 at	 Panipat,	 our	 people	 did	 not	 flinch	 from	 their
warrior	destiny.	Babur	derided	them	as	infidels	but	they	showed	him	how	the	Hindu	warrior	caste	could
fight.	They	attacked	him	at	Khanua	and	nearly	defeated	him.’	Hirabai’s	eyes	glittered	as	if	she	too	were	a
Rajput	warrior	bent	on	spilling	blood.
‘You	asked	me	whether	you	are	a	Moghul.	You	are	–	but	only	in	part.	Never	forget	that	you	are	my	son
as	well	as	Akbar’s	and	that	royal	Rajput	blood	–	a	thousand	times	more	noble	than	Moghul	blood	–	beats
in	your	veins.	The	destiny	that	awaits	you	may	not	be	the	one	you	think	.	.	.	Just	as	your	father	can	choose
which	son	he	names	as	his	heir,	you	have	a	choice	too	.	.	.’
Salim	 stood	 in	 silence,	 too	 confused	 to	 know	 what	 he	 thought.	 Where	 did	 the	 truth	 lie	 between	 his
mother’s	bewailing	of	the	fate	of	her	people	and	his	tutors’	glorious	tales	of	the	Moghuls?	And	where	did
it	leave	him?	Was	his	mother	hinting	that	his	father	might	not	choose	his	eldest	son	as	his	heir	at	the	same

time	 as	 suggesting	 that	 Salim	 might	 have	 to	 choose	 between	 his	 Moghul	 ancestry	 and	 his	 Rajput
inheritance?	But	the	latter	made	no	sense,	especially	when	he	thought	about	his	father’s	pronouncements
that	all	were	equal	within	the	empire	and	about	the	many	Rajputs	who	served	Akbar.
‘But	Mother,	members	of	your	own	family,	the	royal	house	of	Amber,	are	in	the	service	of	the	Moghuls
–	 like	 your	 brother	 Bhagwan	 Das	 and	 your	 nephew	 Man	 Singh.	 They	 wouldn’t	 join	 my	 father	 if	 they
thought	it	dishonourable.’
‘People	can	always	be	bought	.	.	.	even	Rajput	nobility.	I	am	ashamed	of	my	brother	and	my	nephew.’
Hirabai’s	voice	was	cold	and	he	could	see	that	unwittingly	he	had	offended	her.	‘Leave	me	now,	but	think
on	my	words.’
She	turned	away	from	him,	back	to	her	shrine,	and	kneeling	down	again	within	the	halo	of	light	from	a
circle	of	wicks	burning	in	diyas	began	once	more	to	pray.	Salim	hesitated	a	moment,	then	made	his	way
slowly	to	the	stone	staircase	and	down	to	the	courtyard	below,	Hirabai’s	contempt	for	his	father	and	the
Moghuls	 still	 ringing	 in	 his	 ears.	 He	 had	 hoped	 for	 some	 answers	 from	 her	 but	 instead	 his	 head	 only
echoed	with	fresh	questions	about	who	he	was	and	who	he	would	become.

Part	IV
Allah	Akbar

Chapter	15

‘You	Will	Be	Emperor’

here	did	you	get	those?’
Salim	glared	at	Murad.	Two	pigeons,	purple	throats	crimson	with	blood,	were	hanging	from	his
half-brother’s	 silver	 belt,	 but	 Salim’s	 eyes	 were	 fixed	 on	 the	 double	 bow	 he	 was	 holding	 in	 one
hand	and	the	gilded	quiver	of	arrows	in	the	other.
Murad	grinned.	‘I	found	them	lying	in	the	courtyard.	I	thought	you	didn’t	want	them	.	.	.’
‘You	mean	you	stole	them.’
Murad’s	smile	faded	and	he	drew	himself	up.	Though	eleven	months	younger	he	was	nearly	two	inches
taller	than	Salim.	‘I’m	not	a	thief.	How	was	I	supposed	to	know	you	still	wanted	them?	You	never	come	to
the	courtyard	to	join	us	in	our	exercises	and	trials	of	strength	as	you	used	to.	You’re	always	skulking	away
somewhere.	Daniyal	and	I	hardly	ever	see	you	any	more.	Father	says	.	.	.’
Salim	took	a	step	closer.	‘What	does	he	say?’	His	voice	was	low	and	his	narrowed	eyes	were	fixed	on
his	brother’s	face.
Murad	 looked	 a	 little	 taken	 aback.	 ‘Nothing	 really	 .	 .	 .	 except	 that	 you	 spend	 too	 much	 time	 on	 your
own.	He	was	here	just	a	while	ago,	watching	me	practise	my	archery.	When	I	shot	down	the	pigeons	with
this	bow	he	said	I	was	as	skilful	as	he	was	at	my	age.’	He	beamed	with	pride.
‘Give	me	back	my	bow	and	arrows.’
‘Why	should	I?	You	only	want	them	now	because	I	like	them	and	can	use	them	so	well.’
‘I	want	them	because	they’re	mine.’
‘Take	them,	then	–	if	you	can.’	Murad	thrust	out	his	square	jaw.
Salim	felt	a	surge	of	anger,	and	needing	no	further	encouragement	launched	himself	at	his	half-brother.
Though	Murad	was	heavier,	he	was	the	quicker.	Using	his	momentum	he	pushed	Murad	to	the	ground,	then
leaping	on	top	straddled	him,	locking	his	thighs	hard	against	Murad’s	ribs.	Murad	tried	to	poke	his	fingers
into	 his	 eyes	 but	 he	 jerked	 back	 just	 in	 time	 and	 then	 got	 a	 hand	 on	 either	 side	 of	 his	 brother’s	 face.
Grabbing	hold	of	Murad’s	long	black	hair	he	yanked	his	head	up	then	thumped	it	hard	against	the	paving
stones.	There	was	a	satisfying	crack	and	as	he	pulled	Murad’s	head	up	again	to	repeat	the	process	he	saw
a	thin	smear	of	dark	red	blood	on	the	stones.
‘Highnesses,	stop!’	Hearing	agitated	voices	and	feet	running	swiftly	towards	them,	Salim	crashed	his
brother’s	head	once	more	against	the	stones.	Then	he	felt	strong	arms	pulling	him	off	his	brother.	Glancing
up,	he	saw	it	was	Murad’s	tutor.	The	man	carried	him	a	few	steps	away	then	released	him.	Panting	hard
and	wiping	the	sweat	from	his	face,	Salim	had	the	satisfaction	of	seeing	Murad	still	lying	groaning	on	the
ground.	That	would	teach	him	to	challenge	his	older	brother.
Daniyal	had	come	running	into	the	courtyard.	His	eyes	in	his	round	face	looked	startled	but	it	seemed	to
Salim	that	his	younger	half-brother	was	looking	at	him	with	some	admiration.	At	least	he	knew	how	to
fight	.	.	.	But	as	he	looked	round	at	Murad,	who	was	sitting	up	now	and	holding	his	bleeding	head	in	his
hands,	some	of	his	elation	began	to	ebb	to	be	replaced	by	shame	that	he	had	lost	his	temper	so	completely.
If	he	was	honest,	it	wasn’t	the	fact	that	Murad	had	taken	his	bow	and	arrows	that	had	so	enraged	him,	even

‘W

though	 they	 had	 been	 a	 gift	 from	 Akbar.	 It	 was	 hurt	 that	 his	 father	 should	 criticise	 him	 to	 Murad	 –	 and
jealousy	that	they	could	even	have	such	a	conversation.
‘What	has	been	going	on?’	Hearing	his	father’s	deep	voice,	Salim	looked	round	and	his	heart	began	to
pound.
‘He	called	me	a	thief!’	Then	he	attacked	me	as	if	he	wanted	to	kill	me,’	said	Murad,	who	was	now	on
his	feet.	‘All	because	I	borrowed	his	bow	and	arrows.’
‘You	stole	them.	Then	you	said	if	I	wanted	them	back	I	must	take	them.	But	keep	them	if	they	are	so
important	to	you.’
‘You	 are	 brothers.	 Salim,	 you	 in	 particular	 as	 the	 eldest	 should	 know	 better.	 Such	 scuffling	 isn’t
seemly.’	Akbar’s	tone	was	severe.	‘You	both	deserve	to	be	punished	for	brawling	like	urchins	from	the
bazaar.	This	time	I	will	overlook	it,	but	do	not	let	it	happen	again	or	you	will	not	find	me	so	lenient.	As
for	this	bow	and	these	arrows	which	have	caused	so	much	trouble,	let	me	see	them.’
Murad	brought	them	over	and	Akbar	inspected	them	carefully.	‘I	recognise	them	now.	These	were	my
gift	to	you,	Salim,	weren’t	they?	As	I	told	you,	they	were	crafted	by	a	Turkish	master	from	the	very	finest
materials.’
‘He’d	 just	 left	 them	 in	 the	 courtyard	 .	 .	 .	 he	 never	 used	 them	 .	 .	 .	 if	 it	 had	 rained	 they’d	 have	 been
ruined.’	Murad’s	tone	was	all	self-righteousness.
Salim	looked	stonily	ahead.	How	could	he	defend	himself	when	Murad’s	accusation	was	true?	He	had
been	careless	with	Akbar’s	gift.
Akbar	was	looking	at	him,	perplexed.	‘I’m	sorry	you	don’t	like	them.	I	will	keep	them	for	my	own	use.’
Salim	knew	his	father	was	waiting	for	him	to	say	something,	to	offer	some	explanation.	He	wanted	so
badly	 to	 speak	 but	 somehow	 the	 words	 wouldn’t	 come.	 All	 he	 could	 manage	 was	 a	 faint	 shrug	 of	 his
shoulders	which	he	was	sure	looked	like	defiance	rather	than	regret.
A	week	later,	Akbar	still	couldn’t	shake	off	the	sense	of	disquiet	that	had	descended	on	him	since	the	fight
between	Salim	and	Murad.	The	words	spoken	by	the	loser	at	the	end	of	a	game	of	chess	–	shah	mat,	‘the
king	is	at	a	loss’	–	kept	returning	to	his	mind.	That	was	how	he	had	felt	as	he	confronted	Salim	and	he
wasn’t	 used	 to	 it.	 On	 the	 battlefield	 he	 always	 knew	 what	 to	 do.	 And	 governing	 his	 empire	 he	 felt	 the
same	certainty.	His	borders	were	secure,	the	rule	of	law	prevailed	and	he	was	winning	the	loyalty	of	his
subjects,	high	and	low.	So	why	didn’t	he	have	the	same	sure	touch	in	his	private	life?
‘Do	not	take	the	love	of	your	sons	for	you	or	for	each	other	for	granted	.	.	.’	had	been	Shaikh	Salim
Chishti’s	parting	words	to	him	all	those	years	ago.	In	the	euphoria	of	fathering	three	healthy	sons	he	had
pushed	 the	 Sufi’s	 warning	 from	 his	 mind.	 On	 the	 rare	 occasions	 he	 recalled	 it,	 he	 had	 comfortably
dismissed	it	as	prudent	advice	to	any	father	but	irrelevant	to	him.	Now,	though,	the	recollection	of	those
words	 was	 making	 him	 increasingly	 uneasy.	 Were	 he	 and	 Salim,	 his	 eldest	 son,	 growing	 apart?	 If	 the
bonds	between	them	were	indeed	weakening,	to	what	might	it	lead	as	Salim	grew	older,	and	what	could
he	do	to	prevent	it?
Several	times	he	had	felt	tempted	to	confide	his	concerns	to	his	mother	and	his	aunt,	but	ever	since	their
disagreement	with	him	about	the	management	of	his	haram	he	had	felt	as	inhibited	in	discussing	personal
or	family	matters	with	them	as	Salim	seemed	to	be	in	speaking	to	him.	Instead	his	thoughts	turned	to	Abul
Fazl.	Instinct	told	him	that	his	chronicler	would	understand,	and	might	even	have	some	advice	to	offer	.	.	.
Finally,	one	evening	he	summoned	Abul	Fazl	to	join	him	where	he	sat	alone	in	a	secluded	courtyard	lit
by	candles.
‘I	have	brought	my	ledger	and	my	pen	and	ink,	Majesty.	Did	you	wish	to	dictate?’

‘No	.	.	.	I	just	want	to	talk.	You	have	sons,	don’t	you?’
‘Yes,	Majesty,	two	boys	of	ten	and	twelve.’	Abul	Fazl	looked	surprised.
‘When	you	praise	them	or	give	them	presents,	how	do	they	react?’
Abul	Fazl	shrugged.	‘As	any	boy	would,	Majesty.	They	are	delighted	and	excited.’
‘Like	my	youngest	sons	Murad	and	Daniyal	.	.	.’
‘And	Prince	Salim,	Majesty?	Surely	he	is	the	same?’	Abul	Fazl	probed	gently.
‘No,	he	isn’t.	At	least	not	with	me	.	.	.	It	hurts	me	to	say	this	–	indeed	I	find	it	hard	to	admit	it	to	myself
–	but	it’s	as	if	an	invisible	wall	is	growing	up	between	us.	Before	I	went	to	Bengal	Salim	was	as	open	as
either	 of	 my	 other	 sons	 and	 even	 more	 high-spirited.	 Now	 he	 seems	 quiet	 .	 .	 .	 withdrawn	 .	 .	 .	 and	 he
avoids	my	company.’
‘What	does	his	tutor	say?’
‘That	he	excels	in	everything.	He	can	read	Persian	and	Turki	fluently.	He	fights	well	with	a	sword,	can
fire	a	musket	and	rides	his	pony	hard	playing	polo.	I	know	this	is	true	because	I	have	observed	it	myself.
But	while	my	other	sons	can’t	wait	to	brag	to	me	about	their	doings,	Salim	rarely	seeks	me	out.	I	even
took	him	tiger	hunting	on	his	own	two	weeks	ago.	When	we	flushed	a	great	beast	from	its	hiding	place,	I
let	him	fire	the	musket.	He	yelled	with	excitement	as	the	musket	ball	lodged	in	the	animal’s	throat	but	later
as	we	rode	home	he	said	almost	nothing.’
‘He	is	young,	Majesty,	barely	eleven.	If	you	are	patient	all	will	come	right.’
‘Perhaps.’
‘All	fathers	worry	about	their	children.’
‘But	all	fathers	are	not	emperors.	Though	I	am	young	and	strong	and	confident	that	God	will	grant	me
many	more	years,	I	must	consider	which	of	my	sons	I	wish	to	succeed	me.	They	are	just	boys,	it	is	true,
but	I	cannot	forget	that	my	grandfather	was	a	king	at	only	twelve	years	old.	In	the	early	years	of	his	reign	it
was	 his	 own	 courage	 and	 resolution	 –	 fed	 by	 the	 knowledge	 that	 he	 had	 been	 brought	 up	 to	 rule	 –	 that
helped	him	evade	the	assassin’s	blade	and	outwit	rivals	scheming	for	his	throne.	Whichever	of	my	sons	is
to	be	the	next	Moghul	emperor	must	feel	that	same	sense	of	destiny,	of	duty	to	the	dynasty.	It	cannot	begin
too	early.	In	my	heart	I	wish	my	heir	to	be	my	first-born.	But	if	Salim	is	turning	against	me	or	lacks	the
hunger	and	the	will	to	lead,	what	then?’
Abul	Fazl	was	for	once	silent,	and	the	two	men	sat	wrapped	in	their	own	thoughts	as	one	by	one	the
candles	 began	 to	 gutter.	 Akbar	 signalled	 to	 his	 attendants	 not	 to	 renew	 them.	 Tonight	 he	 preferred	 the
darkness	to	the	light.
His	 tutors	 would	 be	 anxious	 for	 his	 safety	 if	 they	 discovered	 what	 he	 had	 done	 but	 Salim	 didn’t	 care.
Since	that	strange	evening	with	his	mother	he	had	felt	even	more	restless	and	unsettled	than	before.	For	as
long	as	he	could	remember,	he	had	known	that	Hirabai	did	not	love	his	father.	As	he	had	grown	up,	he	had
begun	 to	 understand	 that	 their	 marriage	 had	 been	 only	 a	 political	 alliance.	 But	 never	 before	 had	 he
realised	the	depth	of	his	mother’s	scorn	–	hatred	even	–	for	Akbar	and	the	Moghuls.	Bats	swooped	around
Salim	as	he	ran	but	he	knew	every	inch	of	this	path,	even	in	the	purpling	dusk.
He	 had	 slipped	 out	 of	 the	 palace	 complex	 through	 the	 Agra	 gate,	 mingling	 with	 the	 merchants	 and
tradesmen	returning	homeward	as	the	sun	had	begun	to	slide	beneath	the	horizon.	Instead	of	following	the
crowds	 down	 to	 the	 plain	 where	 light	 from	 hundreds	 of	 dung	 fires	 was	 already	 pricking	 the	 darkness,
Salim	branched	off	down	a	narrow	track	skirting	the	edge	of	the	escarpment.	Another	ten	minutes	of	hard
running	and	he	thought	he	could	see	the	outline	of	a	low	house.	Salim	stopped,	his	blood	pounding	in	his
ears	and	his	breathing	so	loud	that	he	was	sure	the	old	woman	and	the	girl	he	could	see	squatting	by	a

small	fire	outside	the	house	must	be	able	to	hear	him.	But	they	went	on	with	their	work	–	the	girl	shaping
dough	on	a	flat	stone	and	then	handing	the	thin	circles	to	her	companion	who	was	cooking	them	on	a	metal
rack	over	the	fire,	flipping	them	with	a	piece	of	wood.
Salim	 heard	 the	 old	 woman	 exclaim	 in	 dismay	 as	 one	 piece	 fell	 into	 the	 fire.	 As	 he	 came	 nearer	 he
smelled	the	charred	bread.	Somehow	the	very	ordinariness	of	the	scene	gave	him	courage.	He	had	made
his	 decision	 to	 come	 here	 tonight	 without	 any	 forethought	 –	 sparked	 by	 the	 sight	 of	 his	 father	 walking
across	the	sunlit	haram	courtyard	with	Murad	and	Daniyal	laughing	and	talking	beside	him.	Suddenly	his
sense	 of	 being	 an	 outsider	 had	 been	 so	 strong	 that	 something	 had	 seemed	 to	 explode	 within	 him,
questioning	the	point	of	his	existence.	It	was	followed	almost	instinctively	by	the	inspiration	that	the	one
person	who	might	be	able	to	answer	his	questions	was	the	Sufi	mystic	who	had	predicted	his	birth	and	in
whose	honour	Fatehpur	Sikri	had	been	built.	Salim	had	never	seen	the	Sufi	for	himself.	All	he	knew	was
that	he	was	very	old	and	completely	blind	and	that	he	had	refused	Akbar’s	offer	to	house	him	within	the
palace	complex,	preferring	to	remain	in	his	simple	house	beyond	the	walls.
Salim’s	hesitant	steps	had	brought	him	to	the	edge	of	the	rim	of	light	thrown	out	by	the	fire.	The	girl
saw	him	first	and	stood	up.	Then	the	old	woman	followed	the	girl’s	gaze	and	looked	up	at	him.	‘What	do
you	want?’
‘To	see	Shaikh	Salim	Chishti.’
‘My	brother	is	very	frail	–	too	frail	to	be	troubled	by	visitors	who	come	without	warning	at	night.’
‘I’m	 sorry	 –	 I	 didn’t	 think	 .	 .	 .’	 Salim	 stepped	 nearer.	 The	 gems	 round	 his	 neck	 and	 on	 his	 fingers
flashed	in	the	firelight,	which	also	picked	out	the	golden	clasps	on	his	green	silk	tunic.	The	old	woman
was	 studying	 him	 carefully	 from	 his	 leather	 boots	 –	 scuffed	 by	 running	 but	 richly	 embroidered	 –	 to	 the
pearls	hanging	from	his	ear	lobes.	At	last	she	rose.
‘Halima,	finish	cooking	the	bread.’	Then	she	gestured	to	Salim	to	follow	her	inside.
The	lintel	of	the	house	was	so	low	that,	young	as	he	was,	Salim	had	to	duck	beneath	it.	In	the	faint	light
of	two	oil	lamps	he	saw	a	figure	sitting	against	the	far	wall.	It	looked	bulky	but	as	his	eyes	adjusted	Salim
saw	that	the	Sufi	was	half	cocooned	in	a	woollen	blanket.	Far	from	being	large,	he	looked	as	delicate	as
the	Chinese	porcelain	the	merchants	brought	carefully	wrapped	in	layers	of	straw.
‘Brother,	you	have	a	visitor.	A	royal	prince,	by	his	dress.’	The	old	woman’s	voice,	tender	and	soft,	was
quite	different	from	the	brusque	tone	in	which	she	had	spoken	to	Salim.	‘Do	you	have	the	strength	to	talk
to	him?’
The	old	man	nodded.	‘He	is	welcome.	Tell	him	to	sit	near	me.’
The	woman	signalled	to	Salim	to	seat	himself	on	the	woven	jute	mat	that	covered	the	floor	of	beaten
earth,	then	went	back	outside.
‘I	 wondered	 whether	 one	 day	 you	 would	 come	 to	 see	 me,	 Salim.	 You	 are	 sitting	 exactly	 where	 your
father	did	when	he	too	visited	me.’
‘How	did	you	know	who	I	was?	It	might	have	been	one	of	my	half-brothers,	Daniyal	or	Murad	.	.	.’
‘God	has	been	good	to	me.	Even	though	the	external	world	is	hidden	from	me,	he	reveals	many	things	to
me	in	my	heart.	I	knew	it	could	only	be	you	because	you	are	the	only	one	of	Akbar’s	sons	who	needs	my
help	at	present.’
Suddenly	tears	were	pricking	Salim’s	eyelids	–	tears	not	of	sorrow	but	of	relief	that	here	was	someone
who	would	listen	and	understand.
‘Tell	me	what	is	troubling	you,’	the	Sufi	said	gently.
‘I	don’t	understand	who	I	am	–	what	the	purpose	of	my	life	will	be.	I	want	my	father	to	be	proud	of	me
but	I	don’t	know	what	he	expects	of	me,	what	he	wants	me	to	be	.	.	.	I	am	his	eldest	son.	I	should	be	the
next	emperor	but	perhaps	that	is	not	what	he	wants.	What	if	he	prefers	one	of	my	half-brothers	to	me?	And

even	if	I	did	become	emperor,	my	mother	would	hate	me	for	it.	She	says	the	Moghuls	are	barbarians	who
do	not	belong	here.	She	.	.	.’
Shaikh	Salim	Chishti	leaned	forward	from	his	shroud	of	blankets	and	took	Salim’s	face	between	his	dry
old	hands.	‘No	need	for	words.	I	understand	what	you	are	feeling	–	your	doubts	and	fears.	You	look	for
love	yet	fear	that	by	loving	one	parent	you	betray	the	other	.	.	.	You	are	envious	of	your	half-brothers	and
fear	they	may	eclipse	you	in	your	father’s	eyes	.	.	.	that	is	why	you	no	longer	seek	them	out.	You	wonder
whether	you	were	born	to	rule	.	.	.	I	tell	you	this,	Prince	Salim:	the	path	of	the	Moghuls	has	been	hard	and
bloody	but	they	have	achieved	greatness	and	there	is	more	to	come.	You	will	be	a	part	of	that	greatness	–
you	will	be	emperor	.	.	.’
The	Sufi	paused	and	with	his	fingertips	gently	probed	the	contours	of	Salim’s	face	as	if	trying	to	find	by
his	touch	what	his	eyes	could	no	longer	tell	him.	‘You	have	your	father’s	determination	and	strength	but
not	yet	his	experience	and	confidence.	Observe	him,	watch	how	he	governs.	That	is	the	way	to	prepare
yourself	and	to	win	his	approval.	But	just	as	I	once	warned	him,	so	I	must	warn	you.	Watch	those	around
you.	Be	careful	whom	you	confide	in	and	take	nothing	on	trust,	even	from	those	bound	to	you	by	blood	–
your	half-brothers	or	even	the	sons	you	will	have.	I	do	not	mean	that	you	will	always	be	surrounded	by
traitors,	but	you	must	be	aware	that	treachery	is	quick	to	breed.	Ambition	is	double-edged.	It	drives	men
to	achieve	great	things	but	can	also	poison	their	souls	–	yours	as	much	as	any	other	man’s.	Be	on	your
guard	both	against	those	around	you	and	against	your	own	passions	and	weaknesses.	If	you	do,	then	you
will	achieve	the	things	you	yearn	for.’	The	Sufi	released	him	and	leaned	back	again.
Salim	closed	his	eyes	as	a	scene	began	to	take	shape	in	his	imagination:	himself	seated	on	a	glittering
throne,	his	nobles	and	commanders	making	obeisance	before	him.	That	was	what	he	wanted	–	to	be	the
next	Moghul	emperor.	Whatever	doubts	his	mother	had	put	into	his	head	vanished	at	the	glorious	vision
before	him.	He	was	above	all	else	a	Moghul	and	he	would	be	worthy	of	his	inheritance.	He	must	push
aside	the	anxieties	and	uncertainties	that	had	been	tormenting	him	and,	though	still	so	young,	learn	to	be	a
man.	The	Sufi	was	right.	The	way	to	win	his	father’s	love	and	respect	was	by	showing	himself	worthy	to
rule	.	.	.
A	gentle	sigh	from	the	Sufi	broke	into	Salim’s	thoughts.	‘I	am	weary.	You	must	go	now,	but	I	trust	I	have
brought	you	comfort	and	hope.’
Salim	tried	to	find	the	words	to	thank	him	but	emotion	seemed	to	be	choking	him.	‘You	are	truly	great,’
he	managed	at	last.	‘I	understand	why	my	father	holds	you	in	such	honour.’
‘I	am	only	a	simple	priest	trying	to	divine	the	ways	of	God	and	of	man.	I	am	fortunate	to	lead	a	quiet,
peaceful	existence.	That	is	not	your	fate.	You	will	be	a	great	ruler,	but	I	do	not	envy	you	your	life	or	your
glory.’

Chapter	16

Heaven	and	Hell

alim	 felt	 content	 as	 he	 approached	 the	 Agra	 gate	 of	 Fatehpur	 Sikri.	 It	 had	 been	 a	 good	 morning’s
hawking	and	his	birds	had	performed	well,	swooping	down	through	the	pale	early	morning	light	on
doves	and	rats	alike.	Even	better,	in	a	few	weeks’	time	he	was	to	accompany	his	father	on	a	long	hunting
trip.	 Akbar’s	 hunting	 leopards,	 with	 their	 jewelled	 collars	 and	 velvet	 blindfolds,	 would	 soon	 be	 being
readied	to	go	with	them	in	their	brocade-covered	wicker	cages,	and	hundreds	of	beaters	would	be	making
their	preparations	too.
Salim	was	pleased	that	his	father	had	invited	him,	in	preference	to	either	of	his	half-brothers.	Over	the
eight	months	since	his	nighttime	visit	to	Shaikh	Salim	Chishti	he	had	done	as	the	Sufi	suggested,	observing
his	 father’s	 daily	 rituals	 whenever	 he	 could,	 from	 his	 dawn	 appearance	 to	 his	 people	 to	 his	 daily
audiences	when,	surrounded	by	courtiers	and	protected	by	his	heavily	armed	guards,	he	received	petitions
and	dispensed	justice.	The	Sufi’s	words	had	given	him	confidence	that	whatever	else	happened,	one	day
these	 would	 be	 his	 tasks.	 He	 had	 begun	 worrying	 less	 about	 what	 his	 father	 thought	 of	 him	 and
concentrating	more	on	what	it	meant	to	be	a	ruler	of	men.	As	the	Sufi	had	predicted,	this	seemed	to	have
gained	him	a	little	more	of	his	father’s	approval.
If	only	Abul	Fazl	wasn’t	always	there,	scribbling	in	those	ledgers	of	his	and	whispering	in	Akbar’s	ear.
But	his	influence	with	his	father	remained	as	strong	as	ever.	Whenever	there	was	a	problem,	Abul	Fazl,	as
he	himself	might	put	it	in	his	ornate	style,	dodged	between	the	raindrops	of	his	father’s	criticism,	unlike
many	 others	 who	 failed	 to	 meet	 Akbar’s	 exacting	 standards.	 It	 was	 Abul	 Fazl	 who	 often	 prompted	 his
father	to	request	that	Salim	leave	meetings,	arguing	that	the	subject	matter	meant	they	should	be	restricted
to	 those	 most	 closely	 involved.	 Salim	 also	 suspected	 that	 Abul	 Fazl	 was	 behind	 Akbar’s	 stopping	 him
from	attending	any	meetings	of	his	military	council,	much	to	his	dismay.
‘Protect	His	Highness,	the	prince!	Seize	those	men.’	The	sudden	shouts	of	the	commander	of	Salim’s
bodyguard	jolted	him	from	his	thoughts.	Almost	simultaneously	a	man	in	a	scruffy	dark	brown	robe	darted
straight	 across	 the	 path	 of	 Salim’s	 horse,	 which	 skittered	 sideways	 in	 alarm.	 Salim	 pulled	 hard	 on	 the
reins	 to	 steady	 it	 while	 struggling	 to	 unsheathe	 his	 sword.	 Just	 behind	 him	 he	 heard	 the	 neighing	 of	 his
qorchi’s	horse	and	the	youth’s	muttered	curses	as	he	fought	to	control	it.	Almost	at	once	another	man	–
dressed	strangely	and	with	a	sword	in	one	hand	and	a	dagger	in	the	other	–	came	hurtling	in	pursuit	of	the
first,	roaring	words	that	Salim	couldn’t	understand.
The	first	man,	clearly	almost	out	of	breath	and	with	the	second	gaining	fast	on	him,	vanished	down	a
narrow,	 rubbish-filled	 alley	 between	 two	 rows	 of	 mud-brick	 houses.	 Four	 of	 Salim’s	 bodyguards	 had
already	jumped	from	their	saddles	and	were	racing	after	the	two	men	–	the	alleyway	was	too	narrow	for
horses.	 Minutes	 later	 Salim	 heard	 more	 shouting	 and	 yelling.	 Soon	 after,	 the	 two	 malefactors	 emerged,
driven	 from	 the	 alley	 by	 the	 tips	 of	 the	 guards’	 swords.	 The	 man	 brandishing	 the	 weapons	 had	 been
disarmed	but	he	was	glaring	furiously	around	him.	The	other	had	a	bleeding	cut	above	his	left	eye.	The
guards	had	clearly	not	been	quick	enough	to	prevent	a	clash	between	the	two.	Halting	them	a	few	yards	in
front	of	Salim,	a	guard	struck	them	behind	the	knees	with	the	flat	of	his	sword,	sending	both	sprawling

S

face	down	to	the	ground.	Then	two	more	guards	stood	over	them,	feet	resting	in	the	smalls	of	their	backs
in	case	either	should	think	of	trying	to	get	up.
Now	that	he	could	see	them	properly,	Salim	realised	that	the	one	in	the	dark	robe	was	a	Jesuit	priest.
The	cord	round	his	thin	waist	was	frayed	and	the	feet	Salim	could	see	protruding	from	beneath	the	hem	of
his	garment	were	clad	in	the	kind	of	thick-soled	brown	sandals	that	he	had	often	seen	the	Jesuit	visitors	to
his	 father’s	 court	 wearing.	 But	 the	 other	 man	 was	 a	 puzzle.	 Salim	 stared	 down	 at	 the	 stocky,	 broadshouldered	figure.	He	was	clearly	also	a	foreigner,	and	among	the	more	bizarre	Salim	had	ever	seen.	His
long,	 curly	 hair	 was	 a	 bright	 orange	 –	 somewhere	 between	 saffron	 and	 gold.	 He	 was	 wearing	 a	 short,
tight-fighting	 leather	 jacket	 beneath	 which	 his	 backside	 was	 encased	 in	 billowing	 striped	 trousers	 that
ended	mid-thigh	and	were	secured	by	maroon	ribbons.	From	this	curious	clothing	protruded	long,	skinny
legs	clad	in	fine-woven	yellow	wool	stockings.	On	one	of	his	feet	he	wore	a	pointed	black	leather	shoe.
The	other	had	clearly	been	lost	in	the	scuffle	in	the	alley.
‘Stand	them	up,’	Salim	ordered.	As	his	guards	hauled	the	two	men	to	their	feet,	he	leaned	forward	from
the	saddle	to	get	a	better	look	at	the	men’s	faces.	The	Jesuit	he	recognised	–	he	was	one	of	half	a	dozen
priests	sent	from	the	Portuguese	trading	settlement	at	Goa	at	Akbar’s	request	to	work	with	his	scholars	on
translating	some	of	their	holy	books	from	Latin	into	Persian.	He	was	a	thin,	gangling	man	with	angry	red
pustules	on	one	side	of	his	face	and	even	though	some	ten	feet	separated	them	Salim	could	smell	the	acrid,
sweaty	 stench	 of	 him.	 It	 was	 a	 mystery	 to	 him	 why	 these	 foreigners	 didn’t	 visit	 the	 bathhouses	 –	 the
hammans.	How	could	they	endure	to	stink	like	mules?
The	other	man	looked	even	odder	standing	up.	He	had	a	clean-shaven	upper	lip	but	a	pointed	beard	like
a	billy	goat’s.	His	bulbous,	pale-lashed	eyes	were	bright	blue	and	his	complexion	nearly	as	red	as	his	hair
–	or,	in	the	case	of	the	shining,	peeling	end	of	his	nose,	even	redder.	He	began	brushing	the	dust	from	his
garments.
‘What	has	been	going	on?’	Salim	addressed	the	Jesuit	in	Persian,	knowing	he	could	probably	speak	it.
The	priest	drew	himself	up.	‘Highness,	this	man	insulted	my	religion.	He	called	my	master	the	Pope	a
scarlet	whore	of	Babylon	.	.	.	he	said—’
‘Enough.’	 Salim	 had	 no	 idea	 what	 the	 Jesuit	 was	 talking	 about	 except	 that	 there	 had	 been	 a	 quarrel
about	religion.	‘Where	is	he	from?’
‘From	 England.	 He	 is	 a	 merchant	 newly	 arrived	 in	 Fatehpur	 Sikri	 with	 some	 of	 his	 devilish
companions.’
‘What	did	you	say	to	make	him	so	angry	he	unsheathed	his	weapons?’
‘Only	the	truth,	Highness,	that	the	queen	of	his	country	is	a	bastard	whore	who	will	rot	in	hell	as	will
all	his	miserable	heretic	compatriots.’
The	 merchant	 was	 listening	 to	 the	 exchange	 beneath	 lowering	 brows	 though	 clearly	 unable	 to
comprehend	a	word.	Salim	knew	where	England	was.	A	small	country	on	a	wind-buffeted,	rainwashed
island	on	the	fringes	of	the	known	world	ruled	by	a	queen	with	hair	as	red	as	this	man’s.	He	had	even	seen
a	 miniature	 portrait	 of	 her	 brought	 to	 the	 court	 by	 a	 Turkish	 merchant	 who	 knew	 of	 Akbar’s	 love	 of
curiosities.	He	had	sold	his	father	the	picture	in	its	oval	tortoiseshell	frame	studded	with	tiny	pearls	for	a
good	 sum.	 The	 queen,	 wearing	 a	 cream-coloured	 gown	 standing	 out	 stiffly	 from	 her	 body,	 had	 looked
more	like	a	doll	than	a	woman.
‘Does	this	merchant	speak	any	Persian?’
‘No,	Highness.	These	English	are	a	crude,	uneducated	people.	They	speak	nothing	but	their	own	simple
tongue	and	all	they	care	about	is	trade	and	making	money.’
‘Enough.	I	wish	to	question	him.	As	you	seem	to	know	something	of	his	language,	you	will	translate	for
me.	Make	sure	you	do	so	accurately.’

The	Jesuit	nodded	glumly.
‘Ask	him	why	he	makes	war	on	the	emperor’s	streets.’
After	a	brief	exchange	in	what	sounded	to	Salim	a	terse,	guttural	tongue,	lacking	the	graceful	cadences
of	Persian,	the	Jesuit,	lip	curling	with	contempt,	replied,	‘He	claims	he	wished	to	avenge	the	insult	against
his	queen,	his	country	and	his	religion.’
‘Tell	him	there	will	be	no	brawling	on	our	streets	and	that	he	is	lucky	I	do	not	have	him	thrown	into
prison	or	flogged.	But	I	will	be	merciful	because	I	can	see	there	was	blame	on	both	sides.	Tell	him	also	to
come	to	the	court.	My	father	will	wish	to	question	him	about	his	country,	I	am	sure.	As	for	you,	be	careful
whom	you	insult	in	our	land.	Like	this	man	from	England,	you	too	are	only	a	visitor.’
‘I	 bid	 you	 welcome	 to	 my	 ibadat	 khana,	 my	 hall	 of	 worship.	 A	 monarch’s	 first	 duty	 is	 to	 preserve	 his
borders	 and	 if	 possible	 extend	 them	 as	 I	 have	 done	 and	 will	 do	 again.	 But	 I	 believe	 that	 a	 great	 ruler
should	 also	 be	 intent	 on	 extending	 the	 boundaries	 of	 human	 knowledge	 and	 understanding.	 He	 must	 be
ever	curious,	ever	questioning,	and	through	knowledge	seek	to	improve	the	lot	of	his	people.	That	is	why	I
have	summoned	not	only	the	ulama	and	many	Muslim	scholars	here	but	also	the	representatives	of	other
faiths.	Together	we	will	debate	questions	of	religion,	and	by	exploring	what	is	true	and	what	is	false	and
what	is	common	to	us	all	seek	to	shed	a	new	light	on	its	real	meaning.’
Salim,	standing	towards	the	back	of	the	vast	hall,	had	seldom	seen	his	father	look	more	magnificent.
Akbar	was	dressed	in	a	bright	green	brocade	tunic	and	trousers,	with	ropes	of	emeralds	round	his	neck
and	on	his	head	a	turban	of	cloth	of	gold	glittering	with	diamonds.	A	golden	candelabra,	tall	as	a	man,
stood	on	each	side	of	his	throne,	which	was	positioned	on	a	high	dais	approached	by	a	flight	of	marble
stairs.	The	dais	itself	was	placed	towards	the	back	of	a	great	sandstone	platform	on	which	were	grouped
the	assembled	clerics.	The	overall	effect	was	as	if	his	father	were	seated	on	the	summit	of	a	mountain	and
the	men	beneath	him	were	the	trees	clothing	its	slopes.
The	mullahs	of	the	ulama	were	dressed	in	black	–	stout	Shaikh	Ahmad	was	in	the	front	rank	while	Abul
Fazl’s	 father,	 Shaikh	 Mubarak,	 was	 standing	 a	 little	 to	 one	 side	 of	 the	 main	 group.	 The	 Jesuits	 were	 in
their	usual	coarse	dark	brown	robes,	cords	knotted	round	their	waists	and	wooden	crosses	hanging	from
their	necks.	Salim	could	see	among	them	Father	Francisco	Henriquez	and	his	companion	Father	Antonio
Monserrate	 who,	 when	 they	 had	 originally	 come	 to	 the	 court	 nearly	 five	 years	 ago,	 had	 been	 the	 first
Christians	he	had	ever	encountered.
There	were	also	five	Hindu	priests,	calm-faced	men	wearing	only	white	loincloths	and	a	long	loop	of
cotton	thread	round	their	left	shoulders	and	passing	beneath	their	right	arms.	Near	them	stood	holy	men
whom	Salim	knew	to	be	Jains	and	by	their	side	fire-venerating	Zoroastrians	who	had	come	to	Hindustan
long	ago	from	Persia	and	laid	their	dead	on	the	tops	of	‘towers	of	silence’	to	be	picked	clean	by	birds
until	their	bones	shone	white.	Salim	recognised	the	tall,	thin	old	man	with	a	white	beard	and	lively	bright
eyes	standing	behind	the	Zoroastrians	as	a	Jew	from	Kashan	in	Persia	–	a	scholar	who	had	recently	come
to	Akbar’s	court	and	found	employment	in	his	library.
On	 the	 floor	 of	 the	 ibadat	 khana	 –	 because	 he	 was	 not	 himself	 a	 man	 of	 God	 –	 was	 the	 red-haired
English	merchant	Salim	had	encountered	three	months	ago	and	whose	name	–	it	still	sounded	strange	to
him	 –	 was	 John	 Newberry.	 By	 his	 side	 were	 his	 two	 equally	 oddly	 dressed	 companions.	 The	 three
Englishmen	had	taken	lodgings	in	the	town	while	they	awaited	a	reply	from	his	father	to	a	petition	they
claimed	 to	 have	 brought	 from	 their	 queen	 seeking	 permission	 to	 trade.	 Just	 as	 Salim	 had	 anticipated,
Akbar	 was	 keenly	 interested	 in	 what	 the	 strangers	 could	 tell	 him	 of	 their	 faraway	 world	 and	 of	 their
religion	which,	though	also	Christian,	seemed	very	different	from	the	faith	of	the	Portuguese	Jesuits.

The	whole	scene	made	Salim’s	heart	swell	with	pride.	Though	his	father	had	said	little	to	him	about
why	he	was	constructing	the	ibadat	khana,	he	had	often	gone	to	watch	the	sandstone	building	rising	up.
Having	 heard	 his	 father’s	 words	 he	 now	 understood	 its	 purpose	 –	 to	 help	 satisfy	 Akbar’s	 growing
curiosity	about	religion.	His	mother	had	been	wrong	to	deride	the	Moghuls	as	barbarians,	Salim	thought.
What	 higher	 pursuit	 could	 a	 man	 follow	 than	 to	 enquire	 into	 matters	 of	 the	 mind,	 the	 very	 meaning	 of
existence	 itself?	 His	 father	 in	 his	 glittering	 robes	 with	 his	 eagle-hilted	 sword	 by	 his	 side	 seemed	 the
embodiment	not	just	of	physical	might	but	of	true	greatness.	His	grandmother	had	spoken	shrewdly	when
she	 had	 told	 him	 how	 skilled	 Akbar	 was	 at	 creating	 spectacle	 and	 how	 important	 was	 the	 image	 he
projected	 to	 impress	 upon	 his	 audience	 that	 he	 was	 a	 man	 dazzlingly	 unlike	 any	 other.	 If	 he	 were	 to
succeed	his	father,	would	he	ever	be	able	to	reproduce	such	presence?
‘I	have	heard	that	in	far-off	lands	Christian	men	burn	each	other	alive	for	reasons	of	religious	belief,’
Akbar	 was	 saying.	 ‘I	 would	 like	 Father	 Francisco	 and	 Father	 Antonio	 to	 explain	 this	 to	 me.	 Let	 them
speak	up	so	that	all	can	hear.’
The	 Jesuits	 exchanged	 a	 few	 words	 in	 low	 voices,	 then	 at	 a	 nod	 from	 his	 taller	 companion	 Father
Francisco	 began	 to	 speak.	 ‘You	 are	 correct,	 Majesty,	 that	 in	 Europe	 a	 battle	 for	 men’s	 souls	 is	 being
fought.	 A	 great	 evil	 has	 come	 amongst	 us	 of	 the	 Catholic	 faith	 –	 we	 call	 it	 Protestantism.	 Its	 followers
have	 strayed	 from	 the	 true	 path	 and	 refuse	 to	 acknowledge	 the	 authority	 of	 our	 great	 spiritual	 leader	 in
Rome,	the	Pope,	who	stands	between	us	miserable	sinners	and	God	and	is	God’s	representative	on	earth.
The	Protestants	reject	and	revile	our	most	sacred	beliefs	and	read	heretical	translations	of	our	holy	Bible
in	their	own	tongue,	claiming	they	have	no	need	of	an	intermediary	between	themselves	and	God.	In	good
Catholic	 countries	 holy	 men	 –	 we	 call	 them	 the	 Inquisition	 –	 devote	 their	 lives	 to	 rooting	 out	 these
heretics	and,	when	they	find	them,	forcing	them	to	recant.	Those	who	refuse	are	consigned	living	to	the
flames	as	the	first	taste	of	the	torments	of	eternal	damnation.’
‘What	of	those	who	agree	to	return	to	your	“true	path”?’	Akbar	asked.	His	eyes,	resting	on	the	Jesuits’
faces,	looked	very	intent.
‘Even	if	they	acknowledge	their	error,	their	earthly	bodies	are	still	consigned	to	the	flames	to	cleanse
their	souls	of	sin	and	make	them	worthy	to	enter	the	kingdom	of	heaven.’
‘How	do	you	persuade	men	to	change	their	beliefs?	By	debate,	such	as	we	are	having	here?’
The	fathers	exchanged	glances.	‘Indeed,	we	use	force	of	argument	to	bring	stray	sheep	back	to	the	fold,
but	regrettably	we	must	sometimes	also	employ	physical	force.’
‘My	 scholars	 have	 read	 to	 me	 of	 such	 things	 –	 of	 devices	 for	 stretching	 the	 body	 of	 a	 man	 until	 his
joints	leap	from	their	sockets,	of	a	great	wheel	on	which	men	are	spread-eagled	naked	and	beaten	with
iron	bars	until	the	marrow	spurts	from	their	bones,	of	knotted	ropes	twisted	tight	against	men’s	eyes	until
their	eyeballs	burst	.	.	.’
‘Sometimes	 it	 is	 necessary,	 Majesty.	 The	 torment	 of	 a	 few	 hours	 is	 nothing	 compared	 to	 the	 red-hot
fires	of	eternal	hell.’
‘You	torture	women	and	children	as	well	as	men?’
‘The	 devil	 casts	 a	 wide	 net,	 Majesty.	 Women	 are	 especially	 weak	 vessels,	 and	 tender	 years	 are	 no
protection.’
‘But	how	can	you	be	sure	that	the	tortured	have	truly	repented	and	are	not	dissimulating	to	make	their
torments	cease?’
‘Our	Catholic	Inquisitors	are	skilled	in	such	matters,	Majesty,	just	as	your	investigators	are.	Only	last
week	I	saw	two	suspected	thieves	being	buried	up	to	their	arms	in	hot	sand	to	make	them	confess	to	their
misdeeds.	I	see	no	difference.’
‘The	difference	lies	in	whether	a	crime	has	been	committed.	In	the	case	of	the	thieves,	undoubtedly	a

felony	 had	 taken	 place	 and	 the	 magistrates	 were	 attempting	 to	 discover	 the	 truth.	 But	 does	 one	 religion
have	 the	 right	 to	 force	 its	 opinions	 on	 another?	 Isn’t	 that	 the	 question	 we	 should	 be	 addressing?	 In	 my
realms,	 I	 do	 not	 distinguish	 between	 men	 because	 of	 their	 religion.	 My	 advisers,	 my	 commanders	 and
even	my	wives	are	not	all	of	my	own	faith.’
The	Jesuits	looked	grave	and	Salim	could	see	Shaikh	Ahmad	vigorously	shaking	his	head	and	muttering
something	to	another	of	the	ulama,	but	no	one	spoke.
‘Let	us	extend	our	enquiry	.	.	.’	Akbar	continued,	seemingly	content	that	the	import	of	his	words	had
sunk	 in.	 ‘You	 have	 told	 me	 your	 beliefs,	 but	 let	 us	 now	 hear	 from	 one	 of	 these	 Protestants	 you	 were
speaking	of	with	such	disdain	.	.	.	I	wish	to	question	the	Englishman	John	Newberry.	One	of	my	scholars,
a	Turk,	knows	his	language	and	can	translate.’
The	red-headed	Englishman	looked	as	confident	as	a	turkey	cock	and	about	as	truculent,	Salim	thought,
as	he	strutted	forward,	the	Turkish	interpreter	by	his	side.
‘What	is	your	religion,	John	Newberry?	Tell	the	assembled	people	just	as	you	have	told	me	in	private.’
The	merchant	muttered	a	few	words	to	the	Turk	who	began	to	translate	in	a	somewhat	hesitant	voice.	‘I
am	English	and	a	Protestant	and	proud	to	be	both.’
‘You	told	me	that	your	queen	is	the	head	of	your	religion.	Explain	to	us	how	that	came	about.’
Again	 more	 whispering	 between	 Newberry	 and	 the	 Turk,	 but	 the	 interpreter	 seemed	 to	 be	 gaining	 in
confidence	and,	though	having	to	pause	every	few	seconds	for	fresh	information,	was	soon	able	to	keep	up
a	smooth	commentary.	‘When	he	was	very	young,	Her	Majesty’s	father,	our	great	King	Henry,	married	a
princess	who	had	once	been	betrothed	to	his	brother.	However,	as	the	years	passed	and	she	bore	him	only
one	surviving	child	–	a	daughter	–	he	realised	that	by	wedding	his	brother’s	affianced	bride	he	had	sinned
in	the	eyes	of	God.	He	sought	to	remedy	the	ill	by	divorcing	her	but	the	Pope	–	whom	these	Jesuits	revere
so	much	–	refused	to	allow	it.	Our	king	decided	that	he	could	not	permit	such	interference	in	the	governing
of	his	kingdom.	He	declared	himself	the	head	of	the	church	in	England,	divorced	his	wife	and	married	the
woman	who	gave	birth	to	our	present	great	and	blessed	queen,	Elizabeth.’
‘You	have	told	me	your	religion	allows	a	man	only	one	wife,	but	I	have	heard	that	this	King	of	England,
Henry,	took	six	wives.	How?	Are	there	different	rules	for	a	king	in	your	country?’
‘No,	Majesty.	Our	queen’s	mother	was	found	guilty	of	adultery	–	it	was	even	said	she	was	a	witch	–
and	executed.	The	king	married	yet	again	but	his	third	queen	died	when	her	son	was	not	two	weeks	old.
He	divorced	his	fourth	wife	–	a	foreign	princess	–	because	she	did	not	please	his	eye.	His	fifth	wife	–
young	and	beautiful	but	sadly	not	virtuous	–	also	fell	into	the	snare	of	adultery	and	was	beheaded	on	his
orders.	But	the	king’s	sixth	and	final	wife,	a	modest	matron,	outlived	him.’
‘Your	king	might	have	saved	himself	some	trouble	had	he	followed	our	path	and	taken	more	than	one
wife	at	a	time.	And	it	seems	he	did	not	guard	his	haram	well	.	.	.’	A	ripple	of	laughter	went	around	the
hall	of	worship,	but	neither	the	Englishman	nor	the	Jesuits	were	smiling	as	the	Turk	translated	Akbar’s
words.
‘Tell	 me	 about	 your	 queen,	 John	 Newberry.	 Are	 the	 men	 of	 your	 country	 content	 to	 be	 ruled	 by	 a
woman?’
‘She	is	loved	by	our	people	because	she	protects	us	from	the	Catholic	menace	and	keeps	us	free.’
‘Has	she	no	husband?’
‘She	 glories	 in	 being	 a	 virgin.	 Many	 foreign	 princes	 have	 wooed	 her	 but	 she	 says	 England	 is	 her
bridegroom.’
‘Is	she	beautiful?’
‘She	is	more	than	beautiful	–	she	is	glorious.’
Salim	saw	Father	Antonio	whispering	urgently	into	Father	Francisco’s	ear	and	after	a	few	moments	the

latter	stepped	forward.	‘If	I	might	speak,	Majesty,’	he	said	in	his	smooth	court	Persian.	‘You	are	in	danger
of	 being	 misled	 by	 this	 merchant.	 This	 queen	 of	 England	 was	 born	 of	 a	 sinful	 union	 between	 a	 king
inflamed	by	lust	and	a	proven	whore.	This	Elizabeth	is	not	the	legitimate	ruler	of	her	country	–	which	by
rights	should	be	ruled	by	the	Catholic	King	of	Spain	–	but	a	bastard	heretic	leading	her	country	to	eternal
damnation.	Our	master	the	Pope	in	Rome	has	cast	her	out	and	she	will	burn	for	ever.’
The	Turk	was	translating	all	this	for	Newberry,	whose	already	crimson	countenance	was	darkening	as
he	 took	 in	 what	 the	 priest	 had	 said,	 but	 Salim	 saw	 that	 Akbar	 was	 starting	 to	 look	 bored.	 His	 father
enjoyed	philosophical	debate	rather	than	the	trading	of	insults,	and	Salim	was	not	surprised	when	he	rose
abruptly.
‘Enough.	We	will	resume	our	enquiries	another	day,’	he	said,	and	swept	from	the	chamber.
It	 was	 a	 perfect	 autumn	 day.	 Sunlight	 filtered	 through	 the	 dense	 foliage	 of	 the	 forest	 as	 the	 beaters
advanced,	banging	their	gongs	and	shouting	to	drive	the	game	ahead	of	them.	Salim	enjoyed	the	rhythmic
motion	as	the	elephant	bearing	him	and	his	three	attendants	plodded	on.	Some	ten	yards	ahead	he	could
see	 his	 father’s	 elephant,	 Lakna,	 left	 hind	 leg	 scored	 by	 the	 claws	 of	 a	 male	 tiger	 many	 years	 earlier.
Lakna	was	Akbar’s	favourite	hunting	elephant.	He	had	captured	him	himself,	while	still	a	youth,	from	a
herd	of	wild	elephants,	then	tamed	him.
Salim	had	watched	his	father	fearlessly	break	other	elephants.	It	was	a	dangerous	business	requiring
two	men,	each	perched	on	a	tame	elephant	on	either	side	of	the	wild	beast.	Once	in	position,	their	 task
was	to	fling	a	noose	of	stout	rope	round	the	neck	of	the	wild	elephant	and	secure	it	to	the	neck	of	their
own	mount.	Then,	by	progressively	tightening	the	noose,	they	were	able	gradually	to	calm	the	beast	and
bring	it	under	control.	Salim	had	seen	many	good	men	killed	during	the	process.	It	was	easy	to	fall	off	and
what	 chance	 did	 a	 man	 have	 beneath	 the	 feet	 of	 an	 enraged	 elephant?	 Several	 times	 he	 had	 heard	 the
sickening	squelch	of	a	body	trampled	beneath	a	heavy	grey	foot.	Even	after	the	initial	subduing,	months	of
hard	work	remained,	training	the	beast	to	advance	to	order	by	throwing	fodder	down	on	the	ground	before
it.	But	Lakna	had	served	Akbar	well,	and	amply	repaid	the	time	he	had	spent.
The	temperature	was	rising	and	a	bead	of	salty	sweat	ran	into	the	corner	of	Salim’s	mouth.	He	flicked	it
away	with	the	tip	of	his	tongue.	Soon	the	circle	of	beaters,	who	had	been	closing	in	since	dawn,	would	be
tight	enough	and	the	hunt	would	begin.	Glancing	over	his	shoulder	he	saw	his	qorchi	was	following	close
behind	on	a	horse	and	leading	his	own	black	stallion	in	case	he	should	wish	to	exchange	the	elephant	for	a
faster	 mount.	 His	 heart	 was	 thudding	 with	 the	 excitement	 he	 always	 felt	 in	 the	 hunt.	 He	 was	 a	 good
marksman	–	equally	accurate	with	musket	or	arrow	–	and	perhaps	today	he	would	impress	his	father.	He
would	like	to	have	been	riding	with	him	on	Lakna	in	the	golden	howdah	festooned	with	green	ribbons,	but
as	usual	the	bulky	figure	of	Abul	Fazl	was	by	Akbar’s	side.
The	 brief	 shadow	 that	 fell	 on	 Salim’s	 spirits	 as	 he	 watched	 his	 father’s	 elephant	 advance	 into	 a
particularly	 thickly	 wooded	 part	 of	 the	 forest	 passed	 quickly.	 He	 must	 continue	 to	 do	 as	 Shaikh	 Salim
Chishti	had	told	him	–	wait	and	watch	and	learn	and	all	would	come	right.	And	it	was	good	that	his	father
had	invited	him	on	the	hunt.	Hearing	a	sudden	shouting	from	up	ahead,	Salim	reached	over	his	shoulder	to
check	 that	 his	 quiver	 and	 bow	 were	 in	 place	 and	 then	 ran	 his	 hand	 over	 the	 smooth	 steel	 barrel	 of	 his
musket,	a	beautiful	weapon	inlaid	with	triangles	of	mother-of-pearl.	Yes,	he	was	ready.
But	then	he	realised	that	the	shouts	were	more	than	a	cry	for	the	hunt	to	begin	and	were	growing	louder.
Among	them	he	could	make	 out	 the	 words,	 ‘His	 Majesty	 is	 ill!	 Fetch	 the	 hakims!’	 There	 was	 a	 sudden
thudding	 of	 hooves	 and	 two	 of	 Akbar’s	 mounted	 bodyguard	 burst	 through	 the	 foliage	 ahead	 of	 him	 and
galloped	off	towards	the	back	of	the	line	where	the	court	hakims	who	always	accompanied	the	hunt	were

travelling	in	their	bullock	cart.
‘What	is	it?	What’s	happened	to	my	father?’	Salim	shouted	but	in	the	confusion	no	one	was	attending	to
him.	Heart	pounding,	he	climbed	over	the	edge	of	his	howdah	and	lowered	himself	on	two	gilded	straps
until	he	was	close	enough	to	the	ground	to	jump	lightly	down.	Dodging	more	riders	and	a	group	of	beaters,
metal	gongs	now	silent	in	their	hands,	Salim	ran	forward.	His	father’s	elephant	Lakna	was	on	its	knees
and	beside	the	great	grey	shape	Salim	saw	a	group	of	men	clustered	around	a	supine	figure.	Forcing	his
way	through,	Salim	saw	Akbar	lying	on	his	back,	body	arching	as	spasms	rocked	it.	As	Salim	stared,	he
found	himself	repeating	over	and	over,	‘Please	God,	not	yet.’	His	ambitions	and	his	fears	for	the	future	no
longer	seemed	to	matter.
Akbar	 was	 thrashing	 more	 wildly,	 and	 red	 blood	 mingling	 with	 a	 dribble	 of	 spittle	 oozing	 from	 his
mouth	showed	that	he	had	bitten	his	tongue.	Salim	watched	helplessly.	In	his	mind’s	eye	he	already	saw
himself	standing	beside	Murad	and	Daniyal	at	their	father’s	funeral.	He	heard	Hamida’s	and	Gulbadan’s
wails	of	grief	and	saw	the	smile	curving	his	mother’s	lips	at	the	knowledge	that	the	man	she	regarded	as
the	enemy	of	her	people	was	dead.
Abul	Fazl	was	loosening	the	turquoise	clasps	of	his	father’s	tunic,	fingers	trembling.	‘Stand	back,	all	of
you,	 give	 His	 Majesty	 some	 air	 .	 .	 .’	 he	 was	 saying.	 At	 that	 moment	 one	 of	 the	 bodyguards	 returned,	 a
white-robed,	white-turbaned	hakim	mounted	behind	him.	The	crowd	parted	to	let	the	doctor	through.	He
was	a	young,	sharp-featured	man	whose	intelligent	brown	eyes	seemed	to	take	in	the	situation	at	once.
Dropping	to	his	knees	beside	Akbar	he	seized	his	arms	and	held	them	steady.	‘You!’	he	shouted	without
ceremony	to	Abul	Fazl.	‘Hold	His	Majesty’s	legs	to	help	calm	him.	And	you	there,’	he	nodded	at	another
courtier,	‘fold	a	clean	piece	of	linen	–	handkerchief,	face	cloth,	whatever	comes	to	hand	–	and	ram	it	hard
between	His	Majesty’s	jaws	or	he	may	bite	through	his	tongue.’
‘Hakim,	what	can	I	do	for	my	father?’	Salim	asked.
The	doctor	glanced	round.	‘Nothing,’	he	said	tersely	and	turned	back	to	his	patient.	Salim	hesitated	a
moment,	then	getting	to	his	feet	pushed	his	way	through	the	onlookers.	If	he	couldn’t	help	he	would	rather
not	watch.
The	 sunlight	 that	 had	 seemed	 so	 full	 of	 promise	 for	 a	 good	 day’s	 sport	 barely	 half	 an	 hour	 ago	 as	 it
shafted	through	the	canopy	of	leaves	was	now	lighting	the	forest	floor	with	a	harsh,	metallic	brightness.
Salim	wandered	away	through	a	patch	of	low,	scrubby	bushes,	neither	noticing	nor	caring	where	his	feet
were	taking	him.	Reaching	a	clearing	he	paused,	and	more	by	instinct	than	anything	else	suddenly	became
aware	 of	 a	 pair	 of	 bright	 eyes	 watching	 him	 through	 some	 branches.	 It	 was	 a	 young	 deer,	 the	 velvet
mantling	 on	 its	 antlers	 the	 very	 palest	 brown.	 Slowly	 Salim	 reached	 behind	 him	 for	 his	 bow	 but	 then
stopped.	What	was	the	point?	There	was	enough	death	in	the	world.
Almost	at	once	the	deer	bounded	away.	Salim	listened	to	the	sounds	of	the	frightened	animal	crashing
through	the	scrub	and	then	turned	to	retrace	his	own	steps.	Whatever	was	happening	to	his	father,	he	must
face	 up	 to	 it	 and	 any	 implications	 it	 had	 for	 him.	 He	 couldn’t	 hide	 in	 the	 forest	 like	 a	 dumb	 beast	 and
anyway	 in	 a	 few	 moments	 he	 would	 be	 missed	 –	 imperial	 princes	 couldn’t	 wander	 off	 on	 their	 own
unnoticed.	 But	 he	 dreaded	 what	 he	 would	 see	 as	 he	 emerged	 once	 more	 into	 the	 open.	 The	 hakim	 was
standing	 up	 now	 with	 a	 crowd	 gathered	 around	 him,	 listening	 to	 what	 he	 had	 to	 say.	 But	 where	 was
Akbar?	Salim	broke	into	a	run.
As	he	drew	closer,	staring	around	him	in	panic,	he	saw	his	father	sitting	propped	against	a	tree	trunk,
Abul	Fazl	holding	a	flask	of	water	to	his	lips.	His	bodyguards	had	formed	a	protective	circle	around	them
but	they	parted	as	Salim	ran	up.	‘Father	.	.	.’	He	was	half-sobbing	with	relief	to	see	Akbar,	a	little	paler
than	usual	and	long	dark	hair	dishevelled,	but	otherwise	much	as	usual.	The	bright	eyes	that	he	now	turned
on	his	son	had	lost	none	of	their	disconcerting	penetration.

‘There	is	no	need	for	concern.	I	have	had	a	vision	–	a	direct	communication	with	God.	I	felt	my	whole
body	shaking	with	joy,	and	God	revealed	to	me	what	I	must	do.	We	are	abandoning	the	hunt	and	returning
at	once	to	Fatehpur	Sikri,	where	I	have	an	announcement	to	make	to	my	people.	Go	now,	and	let	me	rest.’
Salim	turned	away,	feeling	that	his	father	had	somehow	rebuffed	him.	If	his	father	had	received	some
divine	 revelation	 why	 wouldn’t	 he	 share	 it	 with	 him?	 Did	 he	 think	 he	 was	 not	 to	 be	 trusted?	 Glancing
round,	he	saw	the	man	whom	just	a	little	while	ago	he	had	thought	close	to	death	whispering	with	Abul
Fazl	and	realised	that	all	the	anxiety	he	had	felt	had	turned	to	nothing	more	noble	than	resentment.	He	was
angry	with	himself,	but	angrier	still	with	Akbar.
‘I	have	summoned	you	here	to	the	great	mosque	in	Fatehpur	Sikri	to	hear	an	important	pronouncement.’
Dressed	in	cloth	of	gold	and	with	three	nodding	white	egrets	feathers	secured	to	his	turban	by	a	ruby
clasp,	Akbar	gazed	around	at	the	assembled	mullahs,	courtiers	and	commanders.	Salim,	standing	amongst
them,	 glanced	 up	 at	 the	 small	 women’s	 gallery	 concealed	 from	 public	 view	 by	 a	 carved	 jali	 where	 he
knew	that	Hamida	and	Gulbadan	were	watching	and	listening.	Did	they	have	any	idea	what	Akbar	was
going	to	say?	He	didn’t.	For	the	past	three	days	since	Akbar	had	returned	from	his	hunting	expedition	the
court	 had	 been	 awash	 with	 rumours.	 Akbar	 had	 shut	 himself	 away	 in	 his	 private	 quarters,	 seeing	 only
Abul	Fazl	and,	on	two	occasions,	Shaikh	Mubarak.	Some	even	claimed	that	Akbar	was	about	to	declare
himself	a	Christian.
‘Several	days	ago,	in	his	infinite	goodness	God	spoke	to	me	and	revealed	his	heart.	He	said	that	he	had
chosen	me	because,	like	other	prophets	before	me,	I	cannot	read	and	my	mind	therefore	remains	open	to
hearing	his	voice	in	all	its	strength	and	purity.	He	told	me	that	a	true	ruler	must	not	leave	the	conduct	of
divine	worship	to	others	but	take	this	great	responsibility	upon	their	own	shoulders.	Today	is	Friday,	our
day	of	prayer.	In	past	times	I	would	have	asked	one	of	our	learned	mullahs	to	mount	the	pulpit	to	lead	us
in	our	worship	and	to	recite	the	khutba.	But	because	of	what	God	is	asking	of	me,	I	must	fulfil	that	task	in
front	of	you	all.’
To	 gasps	 of	 surprise	 Akbar	 turned	 and	 climbed	 the	 steep	 carved	 rosewood	 stairs	 leading	 up	 to	 the
marble	pulpit.	Then	in	his	deep,	resonating	voice	he	began	to	recite,	his	voice	building	to	a	climax	as	the
final	words	rang	out,	‘Blessed	be	His	Majesty!	Allah	Akbar!’
Salim’s	head	jerked	back	with	surprise.	Allah	Akbar	meant	‘God	is	great,’	but	his	father’s	words	could
also	 mean	 ‘Akbar	 is	 God’.	 Was	 his	 father	 claiming	 some	 sort	 of	 divinity?	 All	 around	 him	 he	 heard	 a
surprised	buzz	of	conversation.	But	looking	up	again	he	saw	his	father	coolly	observing	the	effect	of	his
ambiguous	cry.	He	raised	his	hands	for	silence,	which	fell	instantly.	‘I	have	commanded	my	most	trusted
spiritual	adviser	Shaikh	Mubarak	to	draw	up	a	document	that	I	will	require	every	mullah	in	my	empire	to
sign,	which	states	that	in	any	question	of	religious	interpretation	I	–	not	they	–	am	the	final	arbiter.’
Salim	saw	Shaikh	Ahmad	and	the	other	members	of	the	ulama	exchange	shocked	glances	as	they	took	in
the	full	import	of	their	emperor’s	words	–	that	he	stood	higher	in	the	knowledge	of	God	than	any	mullah.
Just	like	that	King	of	England,	Akbar	was	claiming	for	himself	not	only	the	role	of	head	of	state	but	of	the
head	 of	 religion	 within	 his	 empire.	 Akbar	 was	 smiling	 a	 little	 and	 Salim	 felt	 a	 new	 awe	 for	 the	 father
whom	with	every	passing	day	he	felt	little	closer	to	understanding.

Chapter	17

Flaming	Torches

ajesty,	the	Jesuit	father	Antonio	Monserrate	requests	an	urgent	audience	with	you.’
Akbar	looked	up	from	the	design	of	a	new	pavilion	drawn	by	Tuhin	Das	that	he	had	been	studying
with	Abul	Fazl,	and	Salim	saw	annoyance	cross	his	father’s	face.	The	talk	of	the	court	was	that	the
Jesuits	were	growing	presumptuous	and	arrogant.	Whatever	Akbar	allowed	them	to	do	–	from	processing
through	 the	 streets	 of	 Fatehpur	 Sikri	 behind	 a	 giant	 wooden	 cross	 with	 candles	 in	 their	 hands	 on	 their
saints’	days,	to	building	chapels,	to	aggressively	seeking	converts	–	never	seemed	to	satisfy	them.	They
had	 even	 petitioned	 Akbar	 to	 appoint	 Father	 Antonio	 as	 one	 of	 the	 tutors	 to	 his	 son	 Murad	 and	 from
courtesy	he	had	agreed.
‘What	does	he	want?’
‘He	would	not	say,	Majesty,	only	that	it	was	a	matter	of	great	urgency.’
‘Very	well.	I’ll	receive	him	here	in	my	private	apartments.’
As	always,	Salim	was	surprised	by	his	father’s	tolerance.	None	of	his	subjects,	however	mighty,	would
dare	 importune	 the	 emperor	 so	 frequently.	 He	 waited	 to	 see	 whether	 his	 father	 would	 dismiss	 him	 and
was	pleased	when	Akbar	signalled	to	him	to	stay.
The	Jesuit	entered,	bowed	briefly	then	without	waiting	for	Akbar	to	say	anything	burst	out,	‘Majesty,	I
heard	something	today	that	I	found	hard	to	believe.	Your	mullah	Shaikh	Mubarak	says	that	you	intend	to
inaugurate	a	new	religion.’
‘What	 you	 heard	 was	 the	 truth.	 At	 the	 next	 Friday	 prayers	 I	 will	 announce	 to	 my	 subjects	 the
introduction	within	my	empire	of	the	Din-i-Ilahi	–	the	“Religion	of	God”.’
‘What	is	this	blasphemy!’	Father	Antonio’s	already	bulbous	eyes	looked	about	to	pop	from	his	skull.
‘Take	care,	Jesuit.	You	have	received	nothing	but	patience	and	indulgence	at	my	court.	In	return	what
have	you	preached	but	narrow	intolerance?	Nothing	you	have	said	has	convinced	me	that	your	Catholic
church	has	anything	particular	to	commend	it.	Indeed,	no	single	religion	seems	to	me	to	eclipse	all	others
in	truth	or	divinity	–	not	even	my	own	Muslim	faith.	That	is	why	I	have	decided	to	fuse	what	is	best	in	all
the	different	religions	–	Hindu,	Jain,	Buddhist,	Christian	and	Muslim	–	into	a	new	faith.’
‘And	where	does	God	sit	in	your	structure	–	at	your	right	hand,	I	presume,	or	will	you	allow	him	even
that?’	Father	Antonio	was	almost	choking	with	indignation.
‘I	am	the	focus	of	the	Din-i-Ilahi	as	God’s	chosen	representative,	his	shadow	upon	the	earth,’	Akbar
said	 calmly	 but	 with	 a	 glint	 in	 his	 eye.	 ‘I	 do	 not	 intend	 to	 supplant	 God	 –	 that	 would	 indeed	 be
blasphemy.’
‘If	you	persist	in	this	misguided	folly	I	and	my	fellow	priests	must	withdraw	from	your	court.	I	regret
that	I	can	no	longer	act	as	a	tutor	to	Prince	Murad.’
‘Leave	if	that	is	your	wish.	Your	closed	mind	disappoints	me.	Indeed	it	makes	me	question	whether	I
wish	men	such	as	yourselves	to	have	even	a	toehold	in	my	empire.	Do	not	provoke	me	further	if	you	wish
your	European	adherents	to	retain	their	trading	settlements.’
‘You	 have	 rejected	 the	 light	 and	 you	 will	 answer	 for	 it	 to	 one	 greater	 even	 than	 you	 think	 yourself.’

‘M

Father	Antonio	spoke	with	real	venom	in	his	tone.	Then	he	gave	a	slight	bow,	turned	and	walked	swiftly
away	through	the	open	double	doors	past	Akbar’s	green-turbaned	bodyguards.
Salim	saw	his	father	and	Abul	Fazl	exchange	amused	smiles.	Clearly	they	had	anticipated	the	priest’s
reactions.	His	own	mind	burned	with	questions	and	for	once	he	did	not	lack	the	courage	to	voice	them.
‘Why	have	you	created	this	religion,	Father?	Won’t	it	anger	the	ulama?’	he	asked.
It	was	Abul	Fazl	who	answered.	‘Let	the	ulama	think	what	they	will.	It	is	a	natural	progression.	His
Majesty	 is	 already,	 of	 course,	 the	 head	 of	 the	 Muslim	 faith	 within	 his	 empire	 but	 his	 subjects	 practise
many	religions.	By	creating	the	new	faith,	the	Din-i-Ilahi,	which	will	be	open	to	all	and	calls	upon	no	one
to	renounce	his	existing	faith,	His	Majesty	will	become	accepted	by	all	his	people	as	one	of	them	–	their
rightful	sovereign	–	and	no	longer	be	regarded	like	his	grandfather	and	father	as	a	foreign	invader.	Central
to	 the	 ritual	 is	 the	 sun	 as	 the	 symbol	 of	 divinity.	 The	 Din-i-Ilahi	 will	 embrace	 the	 Hindu	 principles	 of
reincarnation	and	that	unification	with	the	divine	is	the	ultimate	aim	of	the	believer.	Above	all,	the	Din-illahi	will	teach	men	kindness,	compassion,	tolerance	and	respect	for	all	living	things.	In	so	doing	it	will
help	them	seek	for	spiritual	truth	but	it	will	also	secure	the	Moghul	dynasty.’
Content	 to	 leave	 Abul	 Fazl	 to	 deal	 with	 Salim’s	 question,	 Akbar	 had	 already	 turned	 back	 to	 Tuhin
Das’s	drawing	and	didn’t	see	his	son’s	slight	frown	as	he	contemplated	Abul	Fazl’s	words.	To	Salim	it
seemed	 a	 step	 too	 far.	 Surely	 this	 new	 ‘Divine	 Faith’	 could	 alienate	 people	 just	 as	 easily	 as	 it	 could
reconcile	them	to	their	Moghul	rulers?
‘Majesty,	an	imperial	post	rider	who	passed	by	on	his	way	to	Fatehpur	Sikri	reports	that	the	widow	of	a
village	headman	is	to	be	burned	alive	on	his	funeral	pyre	at	sunset.	You	asked	to	be	informed	of	all	such
incidents	immediately.’
‘Where	is	this	happening?’
‘In	a	village	ten	miles	north	of	here.’
‘I	have	given	explicit	orders	that	I	will	not	tolerate	this	barbarous	practice	of	sati.	How	dare	they	defy
me?	I	will	go	there	myself.	Have	my	horse	saddled	at	once	and	detail	a	detachment	of	my	bodyguards	to
accompany	me.’
Salim	had	seldom	seen	his	father	so	openly	angry.	Without	waiting	for	attendants	to	help	him	he	was
already	pulling	off	his	silk	tunic	ready	to	change	into	riding	clothes.
‘Come	with	me,	Salim.	It	will	be	a	valuable	lesson.	I	allow	my	Hindu	subjects	complete	freedom	of
worship	 except	 in	 this	 one	 thing.	 You	 know	 what	 sati	 is,	 of	 course,	 don’t	 you?	 They	 call	 these	 women
“flaming	 torches	 of	 love	 and	 fellowship”	 but	 they	 are	 just	 victims,	 often	 coerced	 to	 die	 with	 their
husbands	 by	 relatives	 out	 of	 some	 distorted	 perception	 of	 family	 honour.’	 Akbar’s	 eyes	 were	 stern.	 ‘I
thank	God	that	our	people	have	never	practised	such	a	thing.	For	the	Moghuls,	death	on	the	battlefield	is
the	most	honourable	thing	for	a	man.	Which	of	us	would	not,	in	his	heart,	choose	to	die	in	battle,	rather
than	 ingloriously	 in	 our	 beds?	 But	 which	 of	 us	 would	 find	 similar	 honour	 in	 the	 idea	 of	 our	 women
committing	 suicide	 because	 we	 were	 no	 more?	 Don’t	 you	 agree,	 Salim?’	 Akbar’s	 attendants	 were	 now
dressing	him	in	a	tunic	and	pantaloons	and	fastening	a	green	brocade	sash	round	his	still	muscular	waist.
Salim	nodded.	What	he	didn’t	tell	his	father	was	how	tales	of	sati	victims	both	repelled	and	fascinated
him.	Death	came	so	randomly	–	a	friend	of	his	own	age	had	recently	caught	the	spotted	fever	and	died
within	two	days.	Mortality	was	hard	to	comprehend,	especially	when	you	were	young.	Perhaps	that	was
why	 it	 held	 such	 a	 morbid	 allure.	 Despite	 himself,	 he	 always	 listened	 with	 half-guilty	 curiosity	 to
descriptions	of	the	women’s	screams	rising	above	the	crackling	of	the	blazing	pyre	and	even	of	victims
trying	 frantically	 to	 escape,	 hair	 and	 clothes	 already	 alight,	 only	 to	 be	 thrown	 back	 by	 their	 husbands’

relatives.
‘Quickly,	Salim.	The	sooner	we	get	there	the	better	chance	we	have	of	halting	this	crime.’
Galloping	by	his	father’s	side	out	of	Fatehpur	Sikri,	bodyguards	in	their	green	tunics	behind	them	and
four	heralds	with	silver	trumpets	riding	ahead	to	clear	the	way,	Salim	felt	proud	that	his	father	had	chosen
him	to	accompany	him,	as	well	as	a	visceral	thrill	at	the	adventure	ahead.
It	was	a	hot	afternoon	in	late	March	and	puffs	of	pale	dust	rose	from	the	hard-baked	ground	beneath	the
horses’	hooves.	Squinting	up	into	the	clear,	deep	blue	sky,	Salim	saw	the	sun	was	still	high.	If	the	funeral
was	 to	 take	 place	 at	 sunset	 they	 had	 time,	 though	 Akbar	 showed	 no	 sign	 of	 slackening	 the	 pace.	 His
chestnut	stallion	beneath	its	gold-embroidered	saddle	cloth	was	foamy	with	sweat	and	Salim	saw	that	the
coat	of	his	own	bay	mare	was	mottled	with	it.	Perhaps	this	was	a	little	how	it	felt	to	ride	into	battle	–
something	he	had	never	done	but	longed	for.
They	were	climbing	now	as	they	followed	a	track	over	land	parched	a	deep	gold.	Ahead	it	narrowed,
winding	 up	 to	 the	 top	 of	 a	 steep,	 flat-topped	 hill	 on	 which	 Salim	 glimpsed	 a	 collection	 of	 simple
dwellings.	Beyond,	a	column	of	brown	smoke	was	rising	almost	vertically	into	the	air.
He	heard	Akbar	shout,	‘They’ve	been	warned	of	our	coming	and	have	fired	the	pyre.	They’ll	pay	for
this.’	Glancing	at	him,	Salim	saw	his	father’s	strong-jawed	face	tauten	with	rage	and	frustration.	As	they
urged	 their	 blowing	 horses	 towards	 the	 top	 of	 the	 hill,	 Akbar	 shouted	 to	 his	 men,	 ‘Quickly.	 No	 time	 to
lose!’
Reaching	the	summit,	Salim	saw	that	they	were	on	a	plateau.	To	the	left	was	a	cluster	of	mud-brick	huts
around	a	well	and	on	the	right	a	larger	house,	also	single-storeyed	but	enclosed	by	a	low	wall	–	probably
the	headman’s	dwelling.	No	one	was	there	except	for	two	young	children	fast	asleep	on	a	string	charpoy
beneath	a	neem	tree	and	near	them	a	puppy	which	regarded	the	new	arrivals	without	interest	through	halfclosed	 eyes.	 But	 ahead,	 three	 or	 four	 hundred	 yards	 away,	 Salim	 made	 out	 through	 a	 tangle	 of	 spiny
bushes	a	crowd	of	people	in	dun-coloured	clothes.	Beyond	them	rose	the	plume	of	smoke,	now	thicker
and	darker,	and	orange	flames	flickered.
‘Come	 on!’	 Akbar	 shouted,	 kicking	 his	 stallion	 hard.	 In	 a	 matter	 of	 moments	 they	 burst	 through	 the
bushes	into	a	clearing	where	a	tall	stack	of	brushwood	was	already	well	alight	around	the	edges.	On	top
of	 the	 pyre	 and	 not	 itself	 yet	 burning	 was	 a	 body	 wrapped	 in	 white	 muslin.	 Two	 men	 were	 leaning
forward	with	a	jar	of	what	looked	like	oil	or	ghee	which	they	were	throwing	over	the	corpse,	the	viscous
yellow	liquid	arcing	through	the	air	and	hissing	as	drops	fell	into	the	flames.	At	that	moment	the	corpse’s
clothes	caught	light	and	Salim	caught	the	sweet	stench	of	flesh	starting	to	burn.	Galloping	to	within	ten	feet
of	the	pyre,	Akbar	wheeled	his	horse	to	a	standstill.	The	crowd	had	been	so	intent	on	what	was	happening
that	they	were	slow	to	react.
‘Surround	the	pyre,’	Akbar	shouted	to	his	guards.	Riding	right	up	to	the	crowd,	he	demanded,	‘Who	is
your	leader?’	He	spoke	in	Hindi,	the	local	language,	in	which	he	was	as	fluent	as	he	was	in	Persian,	the
language	of	the	court.
‘I	am,’	replied	one	of	the	men	who	had	been	pouring	the	oil.	‘We	are	cremating	the	body	of	my	father,
who	was	headman	of	this	village.	I	am	his	eldest	son,	Sanjeev.’
‘Do	you	know	who	I	am?’
‘No,	 Excellency.’	 Sanjeev	 shook	 his	 head.	 Salim	 saw	 him	 slowly	 taking	 in	 the	 rich	 trappings	 of
Akbar’s	horse,	the	gems	flashing	on	his	fingers	and	round	his	neck,	the	well-armed	guards	in	their	green
tunics.	Puzzlement	then	alarm	spread	over	his	face,	which	was	badly	disfigured	by	smallpox	scars.
‘I	am	your	emperor.	I	was	told	a	widow-burning	is	to	take	place	here.	Is	that	true?’
Sanjeev	 once	 more	 shook	 his	 head,	 but	 Salim	 saw	 his	 eyes	 flick	 across	 to	 a	 thatched	 windowless
shack.	Akbar	saw	it	too	and	at	once	gestured	to	one	of	his	guards	to	check	inside.	Moments	later	the	man

reappeared	carrying	a	young	woman	in	a	white	sari.	Her	body	was	limp,	and	as	the	guard	came	nearer
Salim	saw	that	her	eyes	were	open	but	unfocused.
‘Lay	her	on	the	ground	and	one	of	you	villagers	fetch	water,’	Akbar	commanded.	A	boy	ran	up	with	a
small	clay	cup.	Akbar	dismounted,	took	it,	and	kneeling	by	the	woman’s	side	held	it	to	her	lips.	The	first
drops	 ran	 down	 her	 chin	 but	 then	 she	 stirred	 and	 opening	 her	 mouth	 began	 to	 swallow.	 Coming	 closer,
Salim	saw	the	huge	dark	circles	of	her	dilated	pupils.
‘Who	is	this	woman?	Speak	or	I	swear	I	will	strike	off	your	head	here	and	now,’	Akbar	said.
Sanjeev	 twisted	 his	 hands.	 ‘This	 is	 my	 father’s	 widow	 Shakuntala	 –	 he	 married	 her	 a	 year	 after	 the
death	of	my	own	mother	and	just	three	months	before	he	fell	ill.’
‘How	old	is	she?’
‘Fifteen,	Majesty.’
‘You’ve	drugged	her,	haven’t	you?’
‘I	gave	her	opium	pellets	to	swallow.	You	don’t	understand,	Majesty.	You	are	not	a	Hindu.	It	is	a	matter
of	 family	 honour	 for	 a	 widow	 to	 follow	 her	 husband	 into	 the	 all-consuming	 heat	 of	 the	 flames	 .	 .	 .	 I
drugged	her	to	ease	the	pain.’
‘You	drugged	her	so	she	wouldn’t	resist	when	you	put	her	on	to	the	funeral	pyre.’
The	young	woman	had	sat	up	and	was	looking	around,	confused.	Behind	her	the	flames	of	the	pyre	were
now	 leaping	 higher,	 crackling	 and	 shooting	 showers	 of	 sparks	 into	 the	 air.	 The	 smell	 of	 burning	 human
flesh,	 mingling	 with	 the	 aroma	 of	 the	 scented	 oils	 and	 butter	 with	 which	 the	 brushwood	 had	 been
drenched,	was	growing	ever	more	pungent.	Suddenly	aware	of	where	she	was	and	what	was	happening,
Shakuntala	got	shakily	to	her	feet	and	turned	towards	the	pyre.	At	its	heart	the	body	of	her	dead	husband
was	now	burning	like	a	torch.	As	she	watched,	the	corpse’s	head	burst	open	with	a	crack,	followed	by	a
frying	sound	as	the	brains	were	immediately	incinerated.
Sanjeev	glared	at	her,	for	the	moment	oblivious	of	Akbar	and	his	entourage	or	of	the	villagers	silently
watching.	‘It	is	your	duty	to	perish	in	the	flames	consuming	your	husband’s	body.	My	mother	would	have
done	so	had	she	outlived	him	and	she	would	have	been	proud	of	it.	You	are	bringing	shame	on	my	family’s
good	name.’
‘No.	You	are	the	one	committing	a	shameful	act.	I	have	forbidden	sati	throughout	my	empire.	Whether
the	 widow	 is	 willing	 or	 unwilling,	 I	 will	 not	 tolerate	 such	 barbarous	 practices.’	 Akbar	 turned	 to	 the
woman.	‘You	cannot	stay	here.	You	would	not	be	safe.	I	am	Akbar,	your	emperor.	I	offer	you	the	chance	to
return	with	me	and	my	men	to	my	court	where	employment	will	be	found	for	you	as	an	attendant	in	the
haram.	Do	you	accept?’
‘Yes,	Majesty,’	the	woman	replied.	Until	that	moment	she	hadn’t	realised	who	Akbar	was	and	Salim
noticed	she	was	scarcely	able	to	look	his	father	in	the	eye.
‘As	for	you,’	Akbar	addressed	the	still	defiant-looking	Sanjeev,	‘if	you	thought	your	religion	required
it,	would	you	be	willing	to	submit	to	the	agony	of	being	burned	alive?	I	wonder.	Guards,	take	hold	of	him
and	bring	him	over	to	the	pyre.’
Sanjeev’s	pockmarked	face	was	suddenly	waxy	with	sweat	and	he	started	to	breathe	heavily.	‘Majesty,
please	.	.	.’	he	begged	as	two	soldiers	grabbed	him	beneath	the	armpits	and	dragged	him	towards	the	fire.
He	 was	 punily	 built	 and	 the	 guards	 could	 toss	 him	 into	 the	 flames	 as	 easily	 as	 a	 bale	 of	 straw,	 Salim
thought.
Akbar	strode	across	to	the	man.	‘Hold	him	by	the	shoulders,’	he	ordered.	‘Let	us	see	how	well	he	can
bear	the	pain	he	was	so	ready	to	inflict	on	others.’
Then,	 gripping	 the	 man’s	 right	 arm	 just	 above	 the	 elbow,	 Akbar	 thrust	 his	 hand	 into	 the	 flames.
Sanjeev’s	screams	split	the	air	and	he	fought	to	break	free	but	Akbar	steeled	himself	to	hold	his	hand	in

the	 brightly	 burning	 fire	 for	 a	 little	 longer.	 Sanjeev’s	 crescendoing	 cries	 were	 now	 more	 animal	 than
human.	Even	the	young	woman	was	no	longer	able	to	watch.
Suddenly	 Sanjeev	 passed	 out	 and	 apart	 from	 the	 crackling	 flames	 there	 was	 silence.	 Supporting	 the
limp	body,	Akbar	pulled	the	man’s	badly	burned	hand	from	the	pyre	and	held	it	up	for	a	few	moments	so
all	 could	 see	 before	 letting	 him	 fall	 to	 the	 ground.	 Then	 he	 turned	 to	 address	 the	 villagers,	 who	 in	 the
shock	of	what	they	had	just	witnessed	had	drawn	even	closer	together	like	a	knot	of	sheep	that	suspects
the	wolf	is	close.
‘You	 have	 just	 witnessed	 my	 justice.	 I	 expect	 my	 laws	 to	 be	 obeyed	 and	 transgressors	 always	 to	 be
severely	punished.	You	are	all	as	guilty	as	this	man	here.’	He	pointed	to	Sanjeev,	who	was	now	beginning
to	come	round	and	moaning	in	anguish.	‘You	knew	what	was	intended	and	did	nothing	to	stop	it.	I	will	not
make	you	feel	the	fire	as	he	did,	but	I	will	give	you	ten	minutes	to	remove	your	livestock	and	possessions.
Then	my	men	will	turn	your	village	into	a	pyre.	Over	the	next	weeks	as	you	labour	to	rebuild	your	houses
you	will	have	time	to	contemplate	the	consequences	of	defying	your	emperor.’
Within	 minutes	 the	 settlement	 was	 ablaze.	 Shakuntala	 was	 mounted	 behind	 one	 of	 the	 guards,	 a	 scarf
thrown	over	her	head	to	preserve	her	modesty,	as	they	rode	back	down	the	hill.	Salim	noticed	that	she	did
not	once	look	back	at	the	place	which	had	been	her	home.	Glancing	at	his	father,	he	realised	he	had	never
felt	so	proud	of	him	or	so	glad	to	be	his	son	and	a	Moghul.
‘He	 was	 magnificent.	 I	 had	 never	 seen	 him	 dispense	 justice	 with	 such	 power	 and	 authority.	 It	 was
different	from	watching	him	at	court	where	everything	is	so	stiff	and	formal	and	seems	to	take	for	ever.’
Ever	 since	 his	 father’s	 rescue	 of	 the	 young	 Hindu	 widow,	 Salim	 had	 felt	 buoyed	 by	 memories	 of	 it,
especially	of	how	his	father	had	known	instinctively	what	to	say	and	do.	That	was	real	power.
‘He	was	interfering	with	the	ancient	ways	of	our	land,’	Hirabai	said	coldly.
‘But	 he	 upholds	 the	 rights	 of	 Hindus.	 Only	 a	 few	 days	 ago	 I	 overheard	 some	 members	 of	 the	 ulama
criticising	his	tolerance.	One	mullah	said	he	had	heard	that	the	emperor	was	going	to	pray	at	the	Hindus’
sacred	 place	 at	 Allahabad	 where	 the	 Jumna	 and	 the	 Ganges	 meet.	 Another	 was	 complaining	 that	 the
emperor	seemed	prepared	to	venerate	anything	–	fire,	water,	stones	and	trees	.	.	.	even	the	sacred	cows	he
allows	to	wander	freely	through	his	towns	and	villages,	even	their	very	dung	.	.	.’
‘Your	father	only	upholds	what	he	approves	of.	He	has	no	right	to	intervene	in	sati.	It	does	not	concern
him.’
‘But	it	does.	He	has	forbidden	it.	Those	villagers	were	defying	him.’
‘They	were	obeying	a	higher	authority	–	their	religion.	That	was	not	disobedience	but	duty.’	Hirabai’s
words	 reminded	 Salim	 of	 what	 Sanjeev	 had	 said	 in	 justification	 of	 his	 actions,	 and	 of	 what	 the	 Jesuits
sometimes	 said	 in	 justification	 of	 acts	 by	 their	 church	 that	 also	 seemed	 barbarous.	 He	 said	 nothing	 as
Hirabai	continued,	‘My	people	–	your	people	–	the	Rajputs	have	practised	sati	almost	since	time	began.
Many	times	when	I	was	a	girl	I	witnessed	Rajput	noblewomen	give	away	their	jewels	and	other	worldly
possessions	and	join	their	husbands	joyfully	on	the	funeral	pyres,	cradling	their	dead	husbands’	heads	in
their	laps	as	the	flames	leapt	around	them,	all	the	while	smiling	and	uttering	not	a	cry.’
‘But	it	was	wrong	.	.	.	why	should	they	give	up	their	lives	before	their	time?	What	good	did	it	do?’
‘It	 proved	 their	 love,	 courage	 and	 devotion	 and	 brought	 honour	 to	 their	 families.	 As	 I	 have	 told	 you
before,	we	Rajputs	are	the	children	of	the	sun	and	of	fire.	We	perhaps	more	than	any	other	Hindus	believe
in	the	power	of	the	flame	to	cleanse	and	ennoble	us.	Many,	many	times	in	our	history	–	the	last	was	at	the
end	 of	 your	 father’s	 siege	 of	 Chittorgarh	 –	 when	 it	 seemed	 that	 our	 menfolk	 faced	 certain	 death	 on	 the
battlefield,	Rajput	women	dressed	in	their	finest	clothes	and	jewels	as	if	it	was	their	wedding	day.	Then,

faces	 transfigured	 by	 the	 glory	 that	 awaited	 them,	 they	 followed	 their	 queen	 in	 a	 stately	 procession	 to
where	a	great	fire	had	been	lit.	One	by	one,	they	committed	the	sacred	rite	of	jauhar,	leaping	joyfully	into
flames	which	reduced	their	bodies	to	ashes	and	set	their	spirits	free	to	rise	again	like	phoenixes.’
Of	course,	no	one	would	ever	expect	her	to	burn	on	Akbar’s	pyre	since	Muslims	did	not	cremate	their
dead,	Salim	thought,	though	looking	at	the	almost	fanatical	pride	on	her	face	he	knew	that	had	his	mother
been	married	to	a	Rajput	she	would	have	followed	him	gladly	into	the	flames.	But	all	Salim	could	think	of
was	Shakuntala’s	terrified	young	face.	Barely	two	years	older	than	he,	she	had	chosen	life	not	death	and
every	instinct	told	him	she	had	been	right.	His	mother’s	veneration	of	suicide	seemed	chilling,	and	proud
though	 he	 was	 of	 his	 Rajput	 ancestry	 this	 was	 something	 he	 couldn’t	 share.	 Many	 times	 when	 trying	 to
judge	between	his	father	and	his	mother	he’d	been	left	confused	and	uncertain,	but	not	this	time.

Chapter	18

Warrior	Prince

have	 decided	 that	 I	 will	 move	 the	 capital	 of	 the	 empire	 from	 this	 city	 of	 Fatehpur	 Sikri	 to	 Lahore.
Preparations	will	begin	immediately.	I	and	the	court	will	begin	our	journey	to	Lahore	in	two	months’
time.	The	council	is	dismissed.’
Standing	at	the	back	of	the	chamber,	Salim	felt	his	heart	beat	faster	as	he	watched	his	father	sweep	past
him	 and	 disappear	 through	 the	 curtained	 doorway	 into	 the	 sunlit	 courtyard	 followed	 by	 his	 tall	 greenturbaned	bodyguards.	By	the	startled	look	on	their	faces	and	the	excited	hubbub	of	voices,	the	members	of
his	father’s	council	were	as	surprised	and	shocked	as	he	was	by	Akbar’s	pronouncement,	which	had	been
made	at	the	end	of	a	routine	not	to	say	tedious	council	session	about	the	level	of	market	taxes.	Only	Abul
Fazl	seemed	unperturbed	as	he	completed	his	notes	of	the	meeting,	the	slight	smile	on	his	smooth	fleshy
face	suggesting	–	probably	intentionally	–	to	any	onlookers	that	Akbar	had	long	since	taken	him	into	his
confidence.	Why	did	he	so	often	feel	like	punching	Abul	Fazl	to	wipe	away	that	supercilious	smile?	Salim
wondered.	Perhaps	because	he	wished	his	father	would	share	more	of	his	thoughts	with	him.	In	particular,
this	decision	to	move	from	Fatehpur	Sikri	both	intrigued	him	and	worried	him.	His	father	rarely	acted	on
impulse.	He	had	probably	calculated	that	to	announce	his	decision	when	and	how	he	had	would	indicate
that	his	mind	was	made	up	and	he	would	brook	no	debate	or	questioning	of	the	move.
Therefore,	the	relocation	must	be	important	to	his	father’s	plans.	But	why?	As	his	father’s	eldest	son,
surely	he	should	know	him	well	enough	to	understand	his	motives.	What’s	more,	what	would	it	mean	for
him?	 Did	 Akbar	 intend	 the	 whole	 court	 to	 move?	 Or	 would	 he	 leave	 some	 part	 of	 it	 behind	 in	 these
beautiful	 new	 buildings?	 Would	 he	 himself	 accompany	 his	 father?	 And	 what	 about	 his	 mother	 Hirabai?
Might	she	be	left	behind	in	her	private	sandstone	palace	in	Fatehpur	Sikri?	That	seemed	only	too	likely.
He	 still	 enjoyed	 his	 visits	 to	 his	 mother,	 however	 infrequent	 they	 had	 become	 and	 however	 often	 she
inveighed	against	his	father.	His	concern	grew	as	he	realised	he	might	be	separated	from	one	or	other	of
his	parents.	He	must	know	what	was	in	his	father’s	mind.	Hadn’t	he	a	right	to	ask?
Without	 pausing	 for	 reflection	 which	 might	 dampen	 his	 resolution,	 Salim	 pushed	 his	 way	 through	 the
assembled	courtiers	lingering	around	the	doorway	of	the	room	to	debate	the	move	to	Lahore.	As	soon	as
he	 was	 out	 in	 the	 courtyard,	 he	 ran	 past	 the	 fountains	 bubbling	 and	 glinting	 in	 the	 noonday	 sun	 to	 his
father’s	private	quarters.	Once	through	the	carved	wooden	doors	that	the	guards	opened	immediately	to
him,	 Salim	 saw	 his	 father	 unbuckling	 his	 ceremonial	 sword.	 Suddenly	 he	 felt	 his	 confidence	 dip	 and
hesitated,	 uncertain	 what	 to	 say	 or	 indeed	 whether	 to	 leave	 as	 quickly	 as	 he	 had	 come.	 However,	 his
father	had	seen	him	enter	and	asked,	‘Salim,	what	do	you	want?’
‘To	know	why	we	are	leaving	Fatehpur	Sikri,’	Salim	blurted	out.
‘It	is	a	good	question	and	a	fair	one	too.	If	you	sit	on	that	stool	over	there	and	wait	a	moment	while	I
change	my	clothes	I	will	give	you	the	answer	you	deserve.’
Salim	sat	on	the	low	gilded	stool,	nervously	twisting	a	gold	ring	given	to	him	by	his	mother	which	he
habitually	 wore	 on	 the	 index	 finger	 of	 his	 right	 hand.	 His	 father	 completed	 his	 change	 and	 washed	 his
hands	and	face	in	a	gold	bowl	of	rosewater	held	out	by	one	of	his	young	attendants	before	dismissing	them

‘I

with	a	wave	of	his	hand	and	sitting	down	on	another	stool	near	his	son.
‘Why	do	you	think	I	decided	to	move	the	court	to	Lahore,	Salim?’
For	a	moment	Salim	was	lost	for	words	as	if	overcome	by	his	temerity	in	questioning	his	father	about	a
major	decision.	Then	he	stammered,	‘I	don’t	know	.	.	.	I	was	so	surprised	that	you	wished	to	leave	a	city
that	you	yourself	had	built	only	recently	at	such	cost	to	honour	the	great	seer	Shaikh	Salim	Chishti	as	well
as	to	celebrate	the	birth	of	my	brothers	and	myself	and	your	great	victories	in	Gujarat	and	Bengal	.	.	.	I
could	 not	 think	 why.	 That	 is	 why	 I	 came	 to	 you	 .	 .	 .	 to	 find	 out	 .	 .	 .	 I	 heard	 one	 of	 the	 courtiers	 say
something	about	the	water	supply	.	.	.’
‘It’s	not	the	water.	That	problem	can	be	solved.	And	put	out	of	your	mind	any	thought	of	the	cost	of	this
city.	 Our	 empire	 is	 now	 so	 rich	 that	 money	 spent	 in	 the	 past	 should	 not	 and	 does	 not	 play	 any	 part	 in
decisions	about	the	future.	I	intend	the	consequences	of	my	move	to	be	greater	power,	greater	wealth	for
the	empire	–	enough	to	build	ten,	even	a	hundred	Fatehpur	Sikris.’
‘What	do	you	mean,	Father?’
‘Your	great-grandfather	Babur	wrote	that	if	a	king	does	not	offer	his	followers	the	prospect	of	war	and
plunder,	their	idle	minds	will	soon	turn	to	thoughts	of	rebellion	against	him.	I	have	myself	come	to	realise
that	 if	 a	 monarch	 doesn’t	 fix	 his	 mind	 on	 conquest,	 neighbouring	 rulers	 think	 him	 weak	 and	 it’s	 only	 a
matter	 of	 time	 before	 they	 contemplate	 invading	 his	 lands.	 The	 reason	 for	 the	 move	 to	 Lahore	 is	 that	 I
intend	to	broaden	the	boundaries	of	our	empire	once	more.’
Exhilaration	mingled	with	relief	in	Salim.	His	father’s	thoughts	were	on	conquest	and	external	wars,
nothing	 else.	 ‘You	 must	 mean	 to	 expand	 our	 northern	 dominions	 if	 you	 base	 our	 command	 centre	 in
Lahore.	But	in	which	direction?’
‘In	all	directions	in	due	course.	The	rulers	of	Sind	and	Baluchistan	have	long	been	a	threat	to	us	and	it
wounds	my	pride	that	the	Shah	of	Persia	seized	Kandahar	during	the	time	Bairam	Khan	was	regent	and	I
have	yet	to	recover	it.	Nevertheless	a	wise	ruler,	however	powerful,	takes	on	only	one	enemy	at	a	time
and	I	have	decided	that	my	first	campaign	should	be	in	Kashmir.’
‘Aren’t	the	rulers	relations	of	ours?’
‘Yes.	Haidar	Mirza,	a	cousin	of	my	father,	seized	the	land	in	Sher	Shah’s	time	and	later	ruled	it	as	a
vassal	of	my	father.	But	his	descendants	–	perhaps	presuming	on	our	shared	blood	–	have	refused	to	pay
us	homage	or	tribute.	Now	they	will	learn	that	there	can	be	only	one	head	of	a	family	and	that	if	he	is	to
preserve	his	authority,	not	to	say	his	throne,	he	must	treat	disrespect	with	equal	severity,	whether	shown
by	 those	 like	 the	 Uzbeks	 whose	 ancestors	 were	 long	 foes,	 or	 those	 closer	 to	 him.’	 Akbar	 paused	 and
Salim	saw	an	icy	look	in	his	eyes.	Then	his	father	went	on,	‘Indeed,	the	latter	may	merit	harsher	treatment
given	their	disregard	of	their	obligations.	Think	only	of	your	grandfather	Humayun.	He	would	have	saved
himself	 much	 trouble	 if	 he	 had	 dealt	 more	 severely	 with	 his	 half-brothers	 when	 they	 first	 showed	 him
disrespect.’
Even	though	he	knew	his	father’s	words	were	aimed	at	the	rulers	of	Kashmir,	not	at	any	closer	relation,
Salim	felt	an	involuntary	shiver.
Salim	looked	out	from	the	swaying	howdah	on	the	large	elephant	that	was	plodding	at	the	end	of	the	line
of	imperial	elephants	upwards	through	the	Vale	of	Kashmir.	Now	that	the	early	morning	mists	had	lifted,
Salim	 could	 see,	 over	 the	 heads	 of	 the	 line	 of	 horsemen	 flanking	 the	 elephants,	 glossy	 green-leaved
rhododendron	 bushes	 bursting	 into	 pink	 and	 purple	 flower	 on	 the	 rolling	 hillside.	 Spring	 came	 late	 to
Kashmir	but	when	it	did	its	beauty	made	the	wait	worthwhile.	Scattered	among	the	emerald-green	grass,
red	tulips	and	mauve	and	purple	irises	stirred	in	the	gentle	breeze.

The	move	to	Lahore	had	gone	smoothly.	Even	his	mother	had	found	little	to	complain	about	in	her	new
quarters,	 which	 were	 as	 airy	 as	 those	 she	 had	 left	 in	 Fatehpur	 Sikri	 and	 had	 the	 added	 advantage	 of
overlooking	the	Ravi	river.	Taking	his	courage	in	his	hands	once	more,	he	had	asked	his	father	whether	he
might	 accompany	 the	 expedition	 to	 Kashmir	 since	 at	 nearly	 fourteen	 years	 of	 age	 he	 wished	 to	 learn
something	 of	 military	 matters.	 To	 his	 great	 joy	 and	 a	 little	 to	 his	 surprise,	 Akbar	 had	 agreed,	 even
suggesting	that	he	should	choose	one	of	his	companions	to	accompany	him.	He	had	picked	Suleiman	Beg,
one	of	his	milk-brothers.	Almost	the	same	age	as	Salim,	he	had	just	returned	from	Bengal	with	his	father
who	had	been	deputy	governor	there	for	some	years.	His	mother	had	died	in	Bengal	and	Salim	had	little
memory	of	his	milk-mother.	Suleiman’s	strength	belied	his	slight	frame	and	he	was	always	ready	to	join
Salim	in	trials	of	skill	or	in	hunting	expeditions.	His	ready	sense	of	humour	could	always	coax	a	laugh
from	the	other	boy,	even	in	Salim’s	darker	moods	when	he	was	preoccupied	with	what	the	future	might
hold	for	him.
Despite	 agreeing	 to	 his	 accompanying	 him,	 Akbar	 still	 rarely	 invited	 him	 into	 military	 council
meetings.	 However,	 unusually,	 the	 previous	 evening	 he	 had	 done	 so.	 When	 he	 had	 entered	 his	 father’s
great	scarlet	command	tent,	he	had	found	Akbar	already	speaking	and	the	council’s	discussion	well	under
way.	Scarcely	pausing,	his	father	had	gestured	to	him	to	take	a	seat	at	the	left-hand	end	of	the	circle	of
commanders	 sitting	 cross-legged	 on	 some	 rich	 maroon	 and	 indigo	 Persian	 carpets	 in	 the	 middle	 of	 the
tent.
Even	before	Salim	had	sat	down,	Akbar	had	continued,	‘.	.	.	so	from	these	reports	from	our	scouts	and
spies	we	can	clearly	expect	to	encounter	a	vanguard	of	the	Sultan	of	Kashmir’s	army	in	the	next	day	or
two	when	the	valley	broadens	out	a	little.	We	must	be	ready	for	them.’	Turning	to	Abdul	Rahman,	the	tall,
muscular	officer	who	several	years	ago	had	taken	over	from	the	ageing	Ahmed	Khan	the	role	of	khan-ikhanan,	Akbar	had	said,	‘Have	the	officers	check	their	men’s	weapons	this	evening.	Double	the	sentries
round	 our	 camp	 tonight.	 Deploy	 a	 full	 screen	 of	 scouts	 about	 our	 column	 when	 we	 move	 out	 in	 the
morning,	which	we	will	do	much	earlier	than	usual	–	an	hour	after	dawn.	You	yourself	will	command	our
leading	troops,	which	should	include	some	of	our	best	squadrons	of	horsemen	and	mounted	musketeers.’
‘Yes,	Majesty.	I	will	treble	rather	than	double	the	number	of	sentries.	And	I	will	ensure	that	each	sentry
post	has	trumpets	and	drums	to	warn	of	any	attack	under	cover	of	the	mist	which	usually	comes	up	in	the
morning.	I	will	also	order	officers	to	make	their	rounds	of	the	posts	every	quarter	of	an	hour.’
‘Do	so,	Abdul	Rahman.’
‘So	 that	 I	 can	 ensure	 your	 protection,	 Majesty,	 in	 what	 part	 of	 the	 column	 will	 you	 take	 your	 place
tomorrow	morning?’
‘I	 will	 lead	 the	 war	 elephants,	 but	 the	 greatest	 protection	 should	 be	 given	 to	 the	 rear	 of	 the	 elephant
column.	My	son	Salim	will	ride	there.	It	will	be	his	first	battle.	He,	and	of	course	his	brothers,	are	the
future	of	the	dynasty,	the	guarantee	that	our	empire	will	continue	to	prosper.	I	have	asked	him	to	join	us
today	so	that	he	can	hear	us	make	our	plans.’	Salim	had	felt	the	eyes	of	his	father’s	commanders	swivel
towards	him	as	Akbar	asked,	‘Perhaps	you	have	something	to	say	to	the	council,	Salim?’
Taken	by	surprise,	Salim’s	mind	had	gone	blank	for	a	moment	but	then,	taking	courage,	he	had	begun.
‘Only	that	I	will	do	my	best	in	the	battle	and	that	I	hope	I	can	be	as	brave	as	your	commanders	and	of
course	you,	Father	.	.	.	and	live	up	to	what	you	expect	of	me	.	.	.’
As	Salim	had	stuttered	to	a	halt,	the	commanders	seated	around	his	father	had	begun	to	applaud	and	his
father	had	said,	‘I	am	sure	you	will.’
However,	 as	 Akbar	 had	 turned	 quickly	 away	 from	 him	 back	 to	 a	 discussion	 of	 the	 command	 of	 the
rearguard,	 Salim	 had	 wondered	 whether	 he	 had	 detected	 in	 his	 father’s	 tone	 and	 expression	 a
disappointment	that	he	had	not	spoken	better	and	more	originally.	Then	excitement	at	the	prospect	of	his

first	battle	had	eclipsed	all	other	concerns	in	his	mind.
Now,	eighteen	hours	later,	the	excitement	was	still	there	as	Salim	gazed	at	the	rhododendron-covered
hillside.	Suddenly,	he	saw	a	movement	behind	one	of	the	most	heavily	leafed	bushes.	‘What’s	that?	Is	it
the	enemy?’	he	asked	Suleiman	Beg.
‘No.	It’s	just	a	deer,’	his	milk-brother	replied.	As	if	in	confirmation,	the	deer	sprinted	out	from	behind
the	bush,	to	be	shot	down	by	one	of	the	column’s	outriders	with	an	arrow	hastily	drawn	from	his	quiver.
‘At	least	some	of	the	men	will	eat	well	tonight,	Suleiman	Beg.’
Ten	minutes	later,	Salim	thought	he	again	detected	movement,	this	time	on	the	tree-lined	crest	of	a	ridge
about	a	mile	away.	Chastened	by	his	previous	mistake	he	tugged	at	Suleiman	Beg’s	arm,	pointed	to	the
ridge	and	whispered,	‘Do	you	see	anything	up	there?’
Before	 Suleiman	 Beg	 could	 answer,	 it	 became	 clear	 that	 there	 was	 something	 and	 it	 wasn’t	 another
deer	for	tonight’s	pot.	There	was	a	blast	of	a	trumpet	from	one	of	the	Moghul	scouts.	Soon	he	appeared
over	 the	 crest,	 hands	 and	 heels	 working	 frantically	 as	 he	 urged	 his	 horse	 down	 between	 the	 trees	 and
shrubs.	A	musket	shot	crackled	out	from	behind	him.	Then	several	other	riders	appeared	in	hot	pursuit.
One,	on	a	black	horse,	was	gaining	fast	on	the	scout	despite	his	zigzagging,	ducking	and	dodging	beneath
and	 through	 the	 bushes	 and	 branches.	 When	 he	 was	 only	 about	 twenty	 yards	 from	 the	 scout,	 the	 rider	 –
without	doubt	a	Kashmiri	–	pulled	back	his	arm	and	moments	later	the	Moghul	fell,	presumably	hit	by	a
throwing	dagger.
By	then,	many	more	Kashmiri	horsemen	were	pouring	over	the	crest	and	charging	towards	the	column,
crashing	down	through	the	vegetation.	The	Moghul	cavalry	on	the	flanks	were	turning	their	horses	to	face
the	 threat	 and	 mounted	 musketeers	 were	 jumping	 from	 their	 saddles	 to	 prime	 their	 weapons	 and	 ready
their	 firing	 tripods.	 Somehow	 the	 Kashmiris	 must	 have	 evaded	 Abdul	 Rahman’s	 screen	 of	 scouts,	 or
perhaps	killed	all	of	them	before	they	could	get	a	signal	away	except	for	the	man	who	had	just	fallen	so
bravely.
Salim’s	heart	began	to	beat	faster	and	he	felt	all	his	senses	heighten.	Behind	him	in	the	howdah	of	his
war	elephant,	two	of	his	bodyguards	were	preparing	their	muskets.	He	could	see	others	doing	the	same	on
the	elephants	immediately	ahead,	while	on	each	the	two	mahouts	sitting	behind	the	elephants’	ears	were
striking	the	beasts’	skulls	to	make	them	turn	to	face	the	attack,	at	the	same	time	trying	to	make	themselves
as	small	a	target	as	possible	in	their	exposed	position.	Suddenly	one	fell,	arms	flailing,	from	the	elephant
two	 ahead	 of	 Salim’s	 and	 crashed	 to	 the	 ground	 with	 an	 arrow	 in	 his	 neck.	 The	 following	 elephant
carefully	avoided	his	prone	body	although	the	man	was	probably	already	dead.
Moments	later,	Salim	heard	an	arrow	hiss	through	the	air	close	beside	him.	Then	he	saw	a	phalanx	of
Kashmiri	 horsemen	 with	 steel	 breastplates	 and	 domed	 helmets	 ornamented	 with	 peacock	 feathers	 come
crashing	into	the	line	of	flanking	Moghul	cavalry.	They	unhorsed	several	of	their	rivals	by	the	impetus	of
their	downhill	charge.	Penetrating	swiftly	towards	the	elephant	column,	they	were	followed	by	more	and
more	of	their	comrades	galloping	down	the	green	hillsides,	some	with	turquoise	battle	banners	billowing
behind	them.	From	time	to	time	a	Kashmiri	or	his	horse	fell,	hit	by	musket	balls	or	arrows.
Once,	a	thick-set,	green-turbaned	Moghul	officer	charged	at	a	Kashmiri	banner	bearer	and	slashed	him
across	the	eyes	with	his	sword	as	they	clashed,	even	succeeding	in	grabbing	the	Kashmiri’s	banner	before
the	 now	 sightless	 rider	 dropped	 from	 the	 saddle.	 However,	 a	 second	 Kashmiri	 thrust	 his	 lance	 into	 the
officer’s	abdomen	as	he	attempted	to	wheel	his	horse	to	re-join	his	comrades.	With	the	turquoise	banner
flapping	around	him,	the	Moghul	fell	from	his	horse,	but	his	foot	caught	in	his	stirrup	and	he	was	dragged
head	bumping	along	the	ground	a	little	way	behind	the	bolting	animal	before	his	body	caught	beneath	the
hooves	 of	 some	 charging	 Kashmiri	 cavalry.	 Freed	 from	 the	 stirrup,	 it	 was	 left	 sprawling	 bloody	 and
mangled	on	the	stony	earth.

Other	Kashmiri	riders	were	now	within	fifty	yards	or	so	of	Salim’s	elephant,	kicking	and	urging	their
mounts	 forward	 through	 the	 Moghul	 cavalry,	 slashing	 around	 them	 with	 their	 swords	 as	 they	 advanced.
Both	Salim	and	Suleiman	Beg	put	arrows	to	their	bows	and	fired,	while	behind	them	the	muskets	of	their
two	 bodyguards	 crackled.	 Salim	 saw	 his	 target	 –	 one	 of	 the	 leading	 Kashmiris	 –	 fall	 from	 his	 horse,	 a
white-flighted	 arrow	 embedded	 in	 his	 cheek.	 Salim	 was	 exultant.	 That	 was	 his	 arrow,	 wasn’t	 it?	 He’d
brought	him	down.	But	his	delight	was	short-lived.	One	of	the	bodyguards	behind	him	–	a	black-bearded
Rajput	named	Rajesh	who	had	guarded	him	and	his	brothers	for	many	years	–	uttered	a	strangled	cry	and
fell	from	the	howdah	clutching	at	his	throat.	Moments	later,	one	of	the	two	mahouts	behind	his	elephant’s
ears	too	collapsed	to	the	ground.	The	elephant	in	front,	turning	in	obedience	to	its	own	mahouts’	urging	to
face	the	Kashmiri	horsemen,	couldn’t	help	trampling	the	body,	releasing	a	rank,	nauseating	smell	as	the
man’s	stomach	and	intestines	ruptured,	bursting	under	the	pressure	of	the	elephant’s	foot.
Salim	fired	again	at	another	Kashmiri	cavalryman	within	thirty	feet	of	his	elephant.	This	time	he	missed
but	his	arrow	hit	the	man’s	horse	in	the	neck.	Thrashing	its	head	about	and	whinnying	in	pain,	it	skittered
sideways,	 causing	 its	 rider	 to	 drop	 his	 lance	 as	 he	 fought	 with	 both	 hands	 to	 control	 his	 mount.	 Salim
heard	 a	 thump	 behind	 him	 and	 the	 howdah	 swayed	 violently.	 Glancing	 round,	 he	 saw	 that	 his	 second
bodyguard	 lay	 slumped	 on	 the	 floor.	 Suleiman	 Beg	 was	 already	 trying	 to	 staunch	 a	 bullet	 wound	 to	 the
man’s	 right	 thigh	 that	 was	 bleeding	 profusely,	 using	 a	 yellow	 cotton	 scarf	 he	 had	 pulled	 from	 his	 own
neck.
Meanwhile	Salim	could	see	a	strong	body	of	Moghul	cavalry	was	now	in	turn	charging	into	the	flanks
of	 the	 Kashmiris,	 attempting	 to	 beat	 them	 back.	 Several	 Kashmiris	 fell	 –	 one,	 a	 burly,	 heavily	 bearded
man	carried	clean	out	of	the	saddle	and	transfixed	by	a	well-aimed	lance	thrust	from	one	of	the	captains	of
the	imperial	bodyguard.	Another	was	decapitated	by	the	heavy	stroke	of	a	Moghul	battleaxe	which	caught
him	across	the	throat	just	beneath	the	jaw,	sending	his	head	flying	backwards	amid	a	spray	of	blood.	The
Moghuls	 were	 succeeding	 as	 he	 knew	 they	 would,	 thought	 Salim,	 but	 then	 the	 elephant	 beneath	 him
lurched	once	more.	The	second	mahout,	a	small,	dark,	elderly	man	wearing	only	a	rough	cotton	loincloth,
had	fallen	from	behind	its	ears	to	the	ground.	Lashing	its	trunk,	the	riderless	beast	began	to	turn	away	from
the	conflict.	As	it	did	so,	it	knocked	a	Moghul	horseman	from	his	saddle.	If	Salim	didn’t	do	something	the
frightened	elephant	would	kill	more	men	and	panic	more	horses.
Disregarding	the	noise	and	the	fierce	conflict	around	him,	Salim	climbed	over	the	raised	wooden	front
of	the	howdah.	He	managed	to	get	his	legs	on	either	side	of	the	elephant’s	body	and	to	slide	down	on	to	its
neck.	Grabbing	at	the	elephant’s	steel	plate	head	armour	to	steady	himself,	he	drew	his	sword.	Reversing
it,	and	despite	the	cuts	its	sharp	edge	made	to	his	hand,	he	used	its	hilt	instead	of	the	mahout’s	steel	rod	to
tap	the	elephant’s	skull	to	give	the	command	for	it	to	halt.	Reassured	by	the	weight	of	a	rider	on	its	neck
once	more,	the	animal	began	to	calm	and	soon	halted.	In	its	panic,	it	had	moved	fifty	yards	away	from	the
centre	of	the	fight.	Turning	round,	Salim	could	see	that	the	survivors	of	the	Kashmiri	cavalry	charge	were
breaking	 off	 the	 battle	 and	 retreating	 back	 through	 the	 rhododendrons	 up	 towards	 the	 ridge	 over	 which
they	 had	 emerged	 less	 than	 an	 hour	 previously.	 Many	 did	 not	 make	 it.	 Salim	 saw	 one	 cream-turbaned
Kashmiri,	realising	that	he	could	not	outride	his	four	Moghul	pursuers	on	his	blowing	black	horse,	turn
and	charge	back	towards	them,	striking	one	from	the	saddle	before	being	cut	down	himself	by	a	blow	to
the	head.
Later	that	day,	Salim	was	summoned	once	more	to	his	father’s	war	council.	This	time	as	he	entered	the
scarlet	command	tent	he	did	not	find	the	discussion	already	in	full	flow.	Rather,	all	eyes	were	turned	to
him	 as	 he	 entered	 and	 his	 father	 was	 conducting	 his	 commanders	 in	 applause.	 As	 he	 made	 his	 way
towards	 the	 stool	 Akbar	 indicated	 to	 him,	 which	 was	 placed	 next	 to	 the	 emperor’s	 own	 gilded	 throne,
Salim	was	untroubled	by	doubts	that	on	this	occasion	at	least	his	behaviour	had	pleased	his	father.

Chapter	19

Jewel	of	Chastity

ou	are	fifteen	years	old.	It	is	time	you	took	your	first	wife.’	Before	Salim	could	reply,	Akbar	strode
off	to	inspect	the	target	–	a	log	of	wood	on	which	three	large	clay	jars	had	been	placed	on	the	parade
ground	beneath	the	royal	palace	in	Lahore	–	at	which	he	had	just	fired	his	musket.	Even	from	three
hundred	yards	away,	Salim	could	see	that	his	father	had	shattered	the	middle	jar.	Since	their	triumphant
return	 from	 Kashmir	 three	 months	 ago	 Akbar	 had	 several	 times	 invited	 him	 hunting,	 hawking	 or	 to
musketry	practice.
Salim	hurried	after	him.	‘Father,	what	did	you	say?’
‘That	 the	 time	 has	 come	 for	 you	 to	 marry.	 As	 well	 as	 helping	 to	 strengthen	 our	 dynasty	 it	 will	 be	 a
celebration	of	our	great	victory	in	Kashmir.’	Akbar	smiled.	Salim	knew	that	not	even	Akbar	had	thought
Kashmir	would	fall	into	his	hands	quite	so	easily.	Confronted	by	the	reality	that	the	mountains	encircling
his	kingdom	were	no	barrier	against	his	determined	Moghul	enemy,	its	ruler	had	rushed	to	sue	for	peace.
In	his	mind’s	eye,	Salim	again	saw	the	Sultan	of	Kashmir	prostrating	himself	at	his	father’s	feet	outside
Akbar’s	scarlet	command	tent	then	standing	meekly	while	the	khutba	was	read	in	the	name	of	the	Moghul
emperor.	Akbar	had	granted	the	sultan	life	and	liberty	but	from	now	on	Kashmir	would	be	firmly	under
Moghul	control.	What	was	more	his	father	–	never	content	with	his	victories	or	his	empire’s	boundaries	–
was	already	readying	his	forces	for	his	invasion	of	Sind.
‘But	who	am	I	to	marry?’
‘After	consulting	with	my	counsellors	I	have	selected	your	cousin,	Man	Bai.	Her	father	Bhagwan	Das,
Raja	of	Amber,	has	already	given	his	consent.’
Salim	stared	at	his	father.	Man	Bai	was	his	first	cousin,	the	daughter	of	his	mother’s	brother.	He	had
only	seen	her	once	when	they	had	both	been	children	and	all	he	could	remember	was	a	quiet,	skinny,	longlegged	little	girl	with	her	hair	bound	in	plaits.
‘You	look	surprised.	I	thought	you	would	be	pleased	to	cross	this	threshold	into	manhood.	I	hear	that
you	are	not	averse	to	visiting	the	girls	in	the	bazaar.’
Salim	 flushed.	 He	 had	 thought	 he	 was	 being	 discreet.	 On	 the	 return	 march	 from	 Kashmir,	 he	 and	 his
milk-brother	 Suleiman	 Beg	 had	 slipped	 out	 from	 the	 imperial	 quarters	 to	 find	 willing	 girls	 among	 the
camp	 followers.	 He	 had	 lost	 his	 virginity	 one	 night	 to	 a	 cinnamon-scented	 Turkish	 woman	 while
encamped	 on	 a	 mountain	 pass	 with	 cold	 winds	 battering	 the	 hide	 walls	 of	 her	 tent	 –	 not	 that	 he	 would
have	 noticed	 had	 the	 tent	 blown	 away.	 Back	 in	 Lahore,	 the	 two	 youths	 had	 taken	 to	 slipping	 out	 to	 the
town	at	night.	There	was	a	particular	inn	where	Geeta,	a	plump	dancing	girl	with	high,	round	breasts,	had
laughingly	been	instructing	him	further	in	the	ways	of	love	while	Suleiman	Beg	had	been	finding	delight	in
the	 arms	 of	 her	 sister.	 Afterwards,	 sneaking	 back	 into	 the	 palace,	 they	 tried	 to	 outdo	 each	 other	 with
exaggerated	tales	of	their	prowess.	But	tumbling	a	girl	in	the	bazaar	was	very	different	from	taking	a	wife.
‘I	am	surprised.	I	hadn’t	thought	of	marriage	at	all	.	.	.’
‘Young	though	you	are,	you	should	have.	Marrying	into	the	houses	of	the	most	noble	of	our	vassals,	as	I
did,	tightens	our	grip	on	our	empire	as	surely	as	conquest.	Such	alliances	give	the	powerful	families	an

‘Y

even	greater	stake	in	our	success.	They	ensure	that	in	times	of	trouble	they	will	support	us,	not	because
they	 love	 us	 but	 because	 it	 is	 to	 their	 advantage.’	 Akbar	 paused,	 eyes	 searching	 Salim’s	 face.	 He	 had
seldom	spoken	to	his	son	so	earnestly.	‘Why	do	you	think	there	are	so	few	uprisings	against	us	and	every
year	 we	 grow	 yet	 richer?	 Why	 do	 you	 think	 that	 the	 ulama	 no	 longer	 dare	 to	 bleat	 openly	 about	 my
policies	of	religious	tolerance	or	my	Hindu	wives	or	my	introduction	of	the	Din-i-Ilahi,	the	Divine	Faith?
My	 position	 is	 unassailable	 and	 that	 is	 in	 good	 part	 because	 of	 the	 alliances	 I	 have	 made	 through
marriage.	 Understand	 this,	 Salim.	 This	 is	 not	 about	 your	 wishes	 nor	 about	 pleasure.	 You	 can	 build
yourself	a	haram	of	concubines	for	that.	It	is	about	duty.	I	have	informed	your	mother	of	my	decision.’
His	father’s	view	of	marriage	was	a	joyless	one,	devoid	of	human	emotion,	Salim	thought,	so	unlike
that	of	his	grandmother	who	often	told	him	of	the	mutual	love	and	support	she	had	shared	with	Humayun.
Perhaps	his	father’s	loveless	marriage	to	his	own	mother	was	at	the	root	of	his	coldness.	It	had	been	his
first	union	and	it	may	have	made	him	even	more	reluctant	to	give	himself	fully	to	succeeding	brides	than
his	self-contained	self-confident	nature	made	him	already.	Certainly	he	never	spoke	of	any	of	them	with
great	affection,	being	seemingly	keener	to	list	the	alliances	they	had	brought	and	how	they	had	contributed
to	his	own	and	the	empire’s	glory.
Anyway,	Hirabai	would	surely	be	pleased	by	his	marriage.	Any	child	he	had	by	Man	Bai	–	and	a	son
might	well	be	a	future	Moghul	emperor	–	would	be	more	Rajput	than	Moghul.	But	then	he	remembered
what	she	had	said	of	her	brother	Bhagwan	Das,	Man	Bai’s	father:	‘People	can	always	be	bought	.	.	.’	As
so	often,	his	mind	became	clouded	with	doubt	and	uncertainty,	though	he	knew	he	should	be	pleased	that
his	father	had	arranged	such	an	important	dynastic	match	for	him.	He	tried	to	look	grateful	–	which	in	his
heart	he	was.
‘When	will	the	wedding	take	place?’
‘In	about	eight	weeks’	time	when	your	bride	arrives	from	Amber.’	Akbar	smiled.	‘That	will	also	give
time	for	guests	to	travel	here	from	all	over	the	empire	and	for	others	to	send	gifts.	I	intend	that	this	will	be
one	of	the	most	magnificent	spectacles	ever	witnessed	in	Lahore	and	have	already	been	planning	it	with
Abul	Fazl.	The	festivities	will	last	for	a	month	with	processions,	camel	races,	polo	matches	and	elephant
fights,	and	every	night	feasting	and	fireworks.	Now,	let	us	return	to	our	target	practice.’
Salim	was	disappointed.	There	was	much	more	he	would	have	liked	to	ask,	but	his	father	was	already
priming	his	musket.
Man	Bai	was	sitting	beneath	her	layers	of	gold-embroidered	veils	in	the	mansion	which	Akbar	had	had
specially	prepared	for	the	entourage	from	Amber.	Two	days	ago	towards	sunset	Salim	had	watched	the
arrival	of	the	long	procession	bringing	his	bride.	First	had	come	forty	Rajput	warriors	mounted	on	creamcoloured	stallions,	breastplates	and	lance	tips	gleaming	in	the	light	of	the	dying	sun.	Six	elephants,	jewels
flashing	in	their	silver	headplates,	had	followed,	bearing	in	gilded	howdahs	on	their	backs	the	personal
bodyguard	 sent	 to	 protect	 Man	 Bai	 on	 her	 journey.	 Then	 had	 come	 his	 bride	 on	 another	 even	 more
gorgeously	caparisoned	elephant.	Silk	curtains,	vivid	blue	as	a	kingfisher’s	wing,	draped	over	her	goldpainted,	 turquoise-inlaid	 howdah	 concealed	 her	 from	 view.	 Immediately	 behind	 came	 her	 personal
waiting	women	riding	on	camels,	heavily	veiled	and	further	protected	from	the	sun	by	white	silk	parasols
embroidered	with	pearls	held	by	attendants	perched	behind	them.	Next	had	trotted	a	further	detachment	of
Rajput	 warriors,	 this	 time	 mounted	 on	 matching	 black	 horses.	 At	 the	 very	 end	 was	 the	 Moghul	 escort,
green	banners	flying,	that	Akbar	had	sent	to	accompany	them.
Salim	had	risen	early	to	dress	in	readiness	for	the	wedding	procession	to	his	bride’s	house	where	the
ceremony	 was	 to	 take	 place	 –	 a	 Hindu	 custom	 that,	 as	 a	 courtesy	 to	 Bhagwan	 Das,	 Akbar	 had	 decreed

should	be	followed.	To	the	high-pitched	wail	of	pipes	and	the	beating	of	drums,	he	and	his	father,	sitting
side	by	side	in	a	jewelled	howdah	on	the	back	of	Akbar’s	favourite	elephant,	had	proceeded	at	a	stately
pace.	 In	 front	 had	 marched	 rows	 of	 attendants	 carrying	 trays	 of	 gifts	 from	 pearls	 and	 gems	 to	 spices,
including	piles	of	the	finest	saffron	sent	by	the	Sultan	of	Kashmir	from	his	crocus	fields.
As	Shaikh	Mubarak	and	two	other	mullahs	began	reading	verses	from	the	Koran,	Salim	glanced	down
at	his	hands,	painted	earlier	that	morning	by	his	mother	and	her	women	with	henna	and	turmeric	for	good
luck.	Somewhat	to	his	surprise	–	and	relief	–	his	mother	had	welcomed	his	betrothal	to	her	niece.	Maybe
the	consideration	that	any	child	born	of	the	marriage	would	be	three-quarters	Rajput	had	outweighed	her
disapproval	of	Man	Bai’s	father,	Salim	thought.	He	shifted	position	a	little,	conscious	of	the	weight	of	the
marriage	diadem	set	with	diamonds	and	pearls	that	Akbar	himself	had	placed	on	his	head.
When	 the	 mullahs	 had	 finally	 finished	 their	 intoning,	 Shaikh	 Mubarak	 turned	 to	 Man	 Bai	 beneath	 her
glittering	coverings	to	ask	the	customary	question,	‘Do	you	give	your	consent	to	this	union?’	Salim	heard
her	muffled	assent	and	saw	the	slight	tilt	of	her	head.	An	attendant	stepped	forward	with	a	red	and	green
enamelled	 ewer,	 and	 as	 Salim	 held	 out	 his	 hands	 poured	 rosewater	 over	 them.	 Then	 another	 attendant
handed	him	a	goblet	of	water	from	which	to	sip	to	confirm	the	union.	I	am	a	married	man,	Salim	thought	as
the	cool	liquid	ran	down	his	throat.	It	seemed	unreal.
As	 the	 wedding	 feast	 got	 under	 way,	 Salim	 scarcely	 saw	 the	 whirling	 Rajasthani	 dancing	 girls	 with
their	jangling	anklets	and	gold-spangled	red	veils	or	the	sinuous	acrobats	–	muscled	bodies	gleaming	with
oil	–	exerting	themselves	to	entertain	him,	or	heard	the	discreet	laughter	of	the	women	of	the	court	sitting
behind	a	carved	wooden	jali	that	enabled	them	to	watch	what	was	happening	without	being	seen.	Neither
did	 he	 taste	 much	 of	 the	 food	 –	 roasted	 pheasants	 and	 peacocks	 adorned	 with	 their	 own	 gilded	 tail
feathers,	 young	 lamb	 cooked	 with	 dried	 fruit	 and	 spices,	 and	 pistachio-	 and	 almond-flavoured
sweetmeats.	All	the	time	he	was	thinking,	I	must	remember	this	moment.	This	is	when	I	became	a	man.
From	now	on,	I	will	have	my	own	household	and	a	bride	as	royal	as	my	own	mother.	A	new	confidence
was	 flowing	 through	 his	 veins,	 and,	 as	 he	 glanced	 at	 the	 small,	 glittering	 figure	 beside	 him,	 a	 surge	 of
excitement	at	the	thought	of	a	new	woman	to	discover.
Salim	smiled	to	recall	how	Hamida	–	not	his	father	–	had	tried	to	talk	to	him	about	the	ways	to	please	a
woman.	 Of	 course,	 modesty	 forbade	 her	 to	 be	 explicit	 but	 he	 knew	 what	 she	 was	 saying	 –	 to	 be
considerate	and	tender	towards	his	young	bride.	He	would	be.	Geeta	had	taught	him	well.	He	understood
how	reining	in	his	own	eager	passion	could	add	to	the	pleasure	of	both.	He	had	gone	to	Geeta	as	an	eager
boy,	newly	initiated	and	as	excited	and	unthinking	as	any	stallion	about	to	be	put	to	stud,	but	she	had	made
him	a	lover	.	.	.	Yet	though	he	hadn’t	needed	Hamida’s	hints	on	the	art	of	love-making,	he	had	been	glad	of
her	instruction	on	the	rituals	of	the	wedding	night	–	how	next	morning	the	bedding	would	be	inspected	to
confirm	that	sexual	intercourse	had	taken	place	and	that	his	bride	had	been	a	virgin.
Three	hours	later,	Salim’s	attendants	removed	his	wedding	clothes	and	jewels	in	the	bedchamber	in	the
haram	of	the	new	apartments	his	father	had	given	him.	On	the	other	side	of	the	green	brocade	hangings	his
bride	–	bathed,	scented	and	oiled	by	her	own	servants	–	was	waiting	for	him	in	the	marriage	bed.	When
he	was	naked,	one	of	his	attendants	fetched	a	green	silk	robe	and	draped	it	over	him,	fastening	the	emerald
clasps	at	throat	and	chest.	Then	the	servants	withdrew.	Salim	hesitated	a	moment,	looking	at	the	brocade
curtains	gleaming	in	the	soft	light	of	the	oil	lamps	burning	in	niches	around	the	chamber.	It	wasn’t	that	he
felt	nervous	but	rather	that	he	wanted	to	fix	this	moment	in	his	mind.	He	might	one	day	be	emperor,	the
Rajput	princess	he	was	about	to	bed	perhaps	the	mother	of	a	future	emperor.	This	was	no	quick,	joyous
tumble	in	the	bazaar	but	perhaps	another	step	in	his	own	story	and	that	of	his	dynasty.
But	at	the	thought	of	the	woman	waiting	for	him	on	the	other	side	of	those	curtains	desire	quickened,
driving	out	such	ideas.	Salim	pushed	the	hangings	aside	and	stepped	into	the	bedchamber.	Man	Bai	was

sitting	up,	the	outline	of	her	breasts	clearly	visible	through	her	almost	transparent	robe	of	peach-coloured
muslin.	Her	long	thick	dark	hair	tumbled	around	her	shoulders	and	the	rubies	she	was	wearing	in	her	ears
gleamed.	Around	her	neck	was	a	slender	gold	chain	also	set	with	rubies.	But	what	held	Salim’s	attention
was	the	excited	expression	in	those	dark,	long-lashed	eyes	and	her	bold,	confident	smile.
He	had	expected	a	shy,	even	bashful	bride	–	Suleiman	Beg	had	teased	him	about	it,	warning	him	not	to
frighten	her	with	his	brothel	manners	–	but	he	could	sense	her	anticipation.	Unfastening	his	robe	he	let	it
fall	to	the	ground	and	walked	over	to	the	bed,	wishing	he	had	fought	more	battles	and	had	scars	to	impress
her	with.	He	sat	down	on	the	edge	of	the	bed,	close	to	but	not	touching	her	and	suddenly	unsure	of	himself.
But	Man	Bai	took	him	gently	by	the	shoulders	with	her	hennaed	hands	and	pulled	him	down	beside	her.
‘Welcome,	cousin,’	she	whispered.	Needing	no	further	encouragement,	Salim	drew	her	closer	and	kissed
her,	feeling	her	full	mouth	open	beneath	his.	Then,	freeing	her	from	her	diaphanous	muslin	robe,	he	began
to	run	his	hands	over	the	soft	contours	of	her	body.	She	was	delicately	boned	with	a	slender	waist	but	her
hips	swelled	voluptuously	and	her	breasts	were	large	–	bigger	than	Geeta’s,	Salim	found	himself	thinking.
Her	 hands	 began	 exploring	 his	 body,	 not	 with	 Geeta’s	 assurance	 and	 expertise	 but	 eagerly	 and
unashamedly	none	the	less.
Parting	 Man	 Bai’s	 thighs,	 he	 began	 to	 caress	 her.	 A	 quiver	 ran	 through	 her	 body	 and	 her	 breathing
quickened.	 After	 a	 few	 moments	 she	 arched	 her	 back	 and	 eyes	 closed	 began	 to	 cry	 out	 softly,	 pressing
herself	 so	 tightly	 against	 him	 he	 could	 feel	 the	 hardness	 of	 her	 nipples.	 Young	 though	 he	 was,	 he	 had
learned	enough	about	women	to	know	that	she	did	not	want	him	to	delay.	Raising	himself,	he	gently	tried
to	enter	her.	She	felt	very	tight.	He	had	never	made	love	to	a	virgin	and	knew	he	must	be	careful	not	to
hurt	 her.	 But	 again	 he	 sensed	 the	 eagerness	 within	 his	 bride.	 Her	 cries	 were	 growing	 louder	 and	 her
hands,	 gripping	 the	 hard	 muscle	 of	 his	 shoulders,	 were	 urging	 him	 on.	 He	 began	 to	 thrust	 harder,	 more
urgently.	Man	Bai’s	cries	were	turning	to	moans	but	they	were	of	pleasure	not	pain.	Then	he	felt	something
within	her	ease	and	he	was	deep	inside	her.	They	were	moving	as	one,	bodies	locked	together	and	their
skin	dewed	with	sweat.	Salim’s	eyes	were	clenched	and	his	head	was	thrown	back.	He	was	trying	to	hold
back	 for	 a	 few	 more	 moments,	 but	 he	 couldn’t.	 The	 climax	 came,	 and	 mingling	 with	 his	 own	 ecstatic
groans	he	heard	Man	Bai’s	gasps	of	pleasure.
Lying	close	to	his	young	bride,	hands	cupping	the	lush	curve	of	her	buttocks,	Salim	said	nothing.	Her
sexual	hunger	had	stunned	him	a	little	but	he	was	glad	to	have	a	wife	who	unashamedly	enjoyed	the	sexual
act	and	on	her	wedding	night	had	been	eager,	not	afraid.	It	was	she	who	spoke	first,	disengaging	from	him,
sitting	up	and	pushing	her	sweat-dampened	hair	back	from	her	face.	‘What	are	you	thinking,	cousin?’
‘That	I	am	fortunate	in	my	wife.’
‘And	I	am	fortunate	in	my	husband.’	She	put	her	hands	round	his	neck.	‘They	told	me	you	were	goodlooking,	but	brides	are	often	told	lies	about	the	men	their	families	want	them	to	marry.	I	only	remembered
you	as	a	tongue-tied	awkward	boy.’
The	 next	 morning,	 the	 wedding	 sheets	 were	 duly	 inspected	 and	 approved,	 and	 drums	 were	 beaten	 to
proclaim	the	success	of	the	wedding	night.	Among	those	presenting	themselves	to	pay	their	respects	to	the
new	 bridegroom	 was	 Abul	 Fazl.	 ‘I	 have	 recorded	 in	 the	 imperial	 chronicles	 that	 Your	 Highness	 was
yesterday	wedded	to	one	of	the	brightest	jewels	of	chastity	in	the	empire,’	he	said	in	his	usual	unctuous
way.	Salim	listened	politely,	as	he	had	to,	but	he	was	glad	when	Abul	Fazl	departed.
The	festivities	over	the	days	that	followed	were	everything	Akbar	had	promised.	Wedding	gifts	from
across	the	empire:	gems,	dishes	of	jade,	silver	and	gold,	high-stepping	Arab	horses,	embroidered	shawls
of	the	softest	wool	–	yet	another	gift	from	the	chastened	Sultan	of	Kashmir	–	and	even	a	pair	of	lions	were
displayed	through	the	streets	of	Lahore.	Camel	races	were	organised	along	the	banks	of	the	Ravi	river.	To
his	 great	 satisfaction	 Salim	 beat	 both	 his	 half-brothers	 in	 one	 contest,	 successfully	 urging	 his	 snorting,

spitting,	splay-footed	mount	over	the	finishing	line,	the	roars	of	the	spectators	in	his	ears.	The	strongest	of
his	father’s	fighting	elephants	were	pitted	against	one	another	within	high	earth	barricades,	fighting	until
their	 grey	 hides	 were	 lacerated	 and	 their	 tusks	 dripped	 with	 blood,	 while	 every	 night	 there	 was	 more
feasting	and	towards	midnight	so	many	fireworks	that	they	turned	the	dark	world	back	to	day.
But	 every	 evening,	 however	 spectacular	 and	 novel	 the	 entertainments,	 Salim’s	 thoughts	 turned	 to	 the
moment	when	he	could	again	be	in	Man	Bai’s	eager	arms	till	the	morning	sun	was	warming	the	palace.
Suleiman	Beg	joked	that	if	he	continued	like	this	he	would	need	ointment	from	the	hakims	to	soothe	his
over-active	loins.
‘I	name	you,	my	first	and	most	beloved	son,	Khusrau.’	So	saying,	Salim	picked	up	the	white	jade	saucer
filled	with	tiny	gold	coins	and	poured	them	gently	over	the	baby’s	head.	‘May	your	life	be	crowned	with
success,	in	token	of	which	I	shower	you	with	these	earthly	riches.’	The	child	blinked,	then	looked	up	at
Salim	from	the	silk-fringed	green	velvet	cushion	on	which	he	was	lying.	Salim	expected	at	any	moment	to
hear	 wails	 of	 protest	 but	 instead	 Khusrau	 smiled	 and	 thrashed	 his	 arms	 and	 legs.	 Salim	 picked	 up	 the
cushion	 and	 raised	 it	 high	 so	 all	 could	 see	 his	 healthy	 young	 son.	 A	 polite	 murmuring	 followed	 as	 the
assembled	courtiers	and	commanders	exclaimed	aloud	at	the	child’s	vigour	and	lustiness	and	uttered	good
wishes	for	his	long	life.
Salim	glanced	at	his	father	standing	by	his	side	on	the	marble	dais.	This	was	Akbar’s	first	grandson	and
his	face,	still	handsome	and	firm-jawed	though	he	was	in	his	forties,	looked	both	pleased	and	proud.	The
previous	day	Salim	had	received	a	pair	of	hunting	leopards	in	velvet	coats,	their	gilded	leather	collars	set
with	emeralds	–	a	certain	sign	of	his	father’s	approval.	Surely	now	that	he	had	become	a	father	himself
Akbar	 would	 give	 him	 some	 position	 in	 which	 he	 could	 demonstrate	 his	 abilities.	 Given	 the	 chance	 to
lead	 a	 Moghul	 army,	 he	 could	 prove	 to	 everyone	 –	 not	 just	 his	 father	 –	 that	 he	 was	 a	 good	 fighter	 and
commander	and	would	one	day	make	a	great	emperor.
His	half-brothers	were	no	rivals,	Akbar	must	see	that.	Murad	had	married	three	months	ago,	but	even	at
his	tender	age	he	had	been	drunk	at	his	wedding	feast	and	later	had	had	to	be	half	carried	to	his	bride’s
bed.	 Salim	 had	 known	 of	 Murad’s	 love	 of	 wine	 and	 spirits,	 but	 until	 his	 wedding	 his	 half-brother	 had
managed	 to	 conceal	 his	 drunkenness	 from	 Akbar.	 Their	 father	 had	 been	 so	 enraged	 that	 he	 had	 ordered
Murad	 immediately	 on	 campaign	 in	 the	 south.	 To	 keep	 an	 eye	 on	 him,	 he	 had	 sent	 one	 of	 his	 senior
commanders	 with	 orders	 that	 not	 a	 drop	 of	 alcohol	 was	 to	 pass	 his	 son’s	 lips.	 As	 for	 Daniyal,	 he	 was
going	 the	 same	 way	 as	 Murad.	 Since	 reaching	 adolescence,	 pleasure	 and	 self-indulgence	 were	 all	 he
seemed	 to	 care	 about.	 Salim	 rarely	 saw	 either	 of	 his	 half-brothers	 but	 he	 had	 heard	 the	 stories,
particularly	 the	 one	 about	 how	 Daniyal	 had	 ordered	 the	 largest	 fountain	 in	 the	 marble	 courtyard	 of	 his
apartments	 to	 be	 made	 to	 flow	 with	 the	 rich	 red	 wine	 of	 Ghazni,	 not	 water,	 and	 how	 he	 and	 his
companions	had	stripped	naked	to	frolic	in	it,	and	the	one	about	the	time	a	drunken	Murad	had	dressed	as
a	woman	and	danced	lewdly	before	not	only	his	courtiers	but	also	an	envoy	sent	by	the	Portuguese	from
their	enclave	of	Goa.
Salim	 smiled	 as	 he	 gently	 placed	 his	 son	 back	 in	 the	 arms	 of	 one	 of	 his	 milk-mothers,	 a	 sister	 of
Suleiman	Beg.	As	he	did	so	he	vowed	he	would	spend	more	time	with	his	son	than	Akbar	had	done	with
him.	He	would	have	more	sons	too,	not	only	by	Man	Bai	but	also	by	his	other	wives	–	Jodh	Bai,	a	Rajput
princess	 from	 Marwar,	 and	 Sahib	 Jamal,	 daughter	 of	 one	 of	 Akbar’s	 commanders.	 He	 enjoyed	 his
growing	 haram.	 His	 father	 was	 always	 urging	 on	 him	 the	 importance	 of	 forging	 alliances	 through
marriage	but	really	he	needed	little	encouragement.	Any	new	woman	if	she	was	young	and	good-looking
was	a	fresh	adventure,	and	if	for	political	reasons	it	was	expedient	to	marry	a	woman	who	was	faded	or

ugly,	well,	not	every	wife	had	to	be	bedded	more	than	once	and	she	could	always	be	found	an	honourable
place	in	his	haram.	That	had	always	been	his	father’s	policy	and	through	his	huge	number	of	wives	he
had,	as	he	so	often	boasted,	done	much	to	pacify	and	consolidate	his	empire.	Why	shouldn’t	he,	Salim,	be
the	same?
The	only	shadow,	as	Salim	moved	to	take	his	place	at	the	feast	to	celebrate	his	son’s	birth,	was	Man
Bai.	She	still	excited	him	sexually	but	he	hadn’t	been	prepared	for	her	jealousy	when,	six	months	after	his
marriage	 to	 her,	 his	 father	 had	 announced	 that	 he	 wished	 Salim	 to	 take	 a	 further	 wife.	 Man	 Bai	 had
pleaded	 with	 him	 not	 to	 do	 it,	 weeping	 copiously	 in	 her	 apartments	 and	 –	 as	 the	 day	 of	 his	 second
wedding	approached	–	refusing	to	eat.	Again	and	again	he	had	explained	that	he	must	obey	his	father	but
she	wouldn’t	listen,	shrieking	at	him	that	he	was	betraying	her.	Summoned	by	a	nervous	attendant	to	his
haram	 one	 night,	 Salim	 had	 found	 Man	 Bai	 perched	 on	 a	 stone	 balustrade	 overlooking	 a	 stone-paved
courtyard	thirty	feet	below.	‘You	have	driven	me	to	this,’	she	had	shouted	as	soon	as	she	saw	him.	‘You
have	made	me	desperate.	Wasn’t	my	love	enough	for	you?	Is	it	because	I	haven’t	yet	conceived?’
With	 her	 wild	 hair,	 red-rimmed	 eyes	 and	 gaunt	 features,	 Man	 Bai	 had	 reminded	 him	 of	 a	 mad	 young
woman	 he	 had	 sometimes	 seen	 in	 the	 bazaar,	 going	 from	 person	 to	 person	 upbraiding	 them	 for	 some
imaginary	 injury	 and	 being	 driven	 away	 by	 stones	 and	 dung.	 He	 had	 hardly	 recognised	 his	 beautiful
Rajput	wife	as	she	clung	trembling	and	dishevelled	to	the	stonework.	He	had	coaxed	her	down,	explaining
as	patiently	and	tenderly	as	he	could	that	as	a	royal	Moghul	prince	he	must	do	his	father’s	bidding	and
marry	again,	but	of	course	it	would	not	affect	his	feelings	for	her.
Except	 that	 it	 had.	 Man	 Bai’s	 unreasoning	 hysteria	 had	 made	 him	 wonder	 what	 else	 he	 didn’t	 know
about	his	cousin.	It	had	also	made	him	realise	that	what	he	felt	for	her	wasn’t	love	–	only	sexual	passion.
She	should	be	happy	living	in	the	magnificence	of	the	Moghul	court	surrounded	by	luxuries	beyond	those
even	 a	 Rajput	 princess	 was	 used	 to.	 He	 made	 frequent	 visits	 to	 her	 bed	 where	 they	 were	 each	 other’s
equals	in	the	giving	and	receiving	of	pleasure.	That	should	surely	be	enough.	It	was	foolishness	to	expect
to	 be	 his	 only	 wife.	 But	 her	 unexpected	 jealousy	 had	 left	 him	 wary	 of	 Man	 Bai.	 His	 visits	 to	 her	 had
grown	less	frequent	and	not	long	after	her	threatened	suicide	he	had	indeed	married	Jodh	Bai.	With	her
plump	body	and	round	face	she	wasn’t	as	beautiful	as	Man	Bai,	but	her	wit	made	him	laugh	and	he	liked
her	company	even	if	he	didn’t	feel	a	close	bond	with	her.
As	fate	would	have	it,	four	months	after	his	marriage	to	Jodh	Bai	and	just	before	his	marriage	to	Sahib
Jamal,	 Man	 Bai	 had	 become	 pregnant	 with	 Khusrau	 –	 the	 first	 of	 the	 next	 generation	 of	 the	 Moghul
dynasty.	The	status	that	conferred	should	satisfy	Man	Bai,	but	if	it	didn’t	there	was	nothing	he	could	do
and	he	would	not	allow	it	to	worry	him	–	though	it	did,	particularly	the	thought	that	their	son	might	inherit
some	of	her	self-centred	lack	of	control.
Akbar’s	deep	voice	interrupted	his	thoughts.	‘Let	us	now	go	to	feast	the	birth	of	this	new	prince.	May
he	and	the	dynasty	prosper.’
As	he	took	his	place	at	the	feast,	Salim	offered	up	a	silent	prayer	for	his	own	prosperity.	If	he	became
the	next	Moghul	emperor,	what	might	he	not	be	able	to	do	for	his	sons?

Part	V
Great	Expectations

Chapter	20

The	Abyss

nce	again,	more	than	three	years	after	his	first	journey	there,	Salim	was	sitting	in	an	elephant	howdah
as	the	great	beast	plodded	its	way	towards	Kashmir.	This	time,	though,	the	circumstances	were	very
different.	 Their	 long	 journey	 was	 aimed	 at	 peace	 and	 pleasure,	 not	 war	 and	 conquest.	 Both	 he	 and	 his
father	 had	 fallen	 in	 love	 with	 the	 beauty	 of	 Kashmir,	 its	 peaceful	 valleys,	 glistening	 lakes	 and	 flowerstrewn	 meadows,	 and	 above	 all	 the	 respite	 it	 provided	 from	 the	 angry	 summer	 sun	 of	 the	 plains.	 The
dozen	elephants	preceding	his	carried	not	warriors	but	members	of	his	haram.	On	the	nearest	was	Man
Bai	with	the	two-year-old	Khusrau.	On	the	next	two	were	Sahib	Jamal	with	Parvez,	the	son	she	had	given
birth	 to	 three	 months	 earlier,	 and	 then	 Jodh	 Bai.	 Beyond	 them,	 further	 towards	 the	 front	 of	 the	 column,
were	the	elephants	bearing	his	father’s	haram.	His	mother	was	not	among	them,	having	scorned	the	cool
of	 the	 mountains	 for	 the	 sun	 of	 her	 native	 lands,	 but	 his	 grandmother	 Hamida	 was	 and	 Salim	 was	 glad.
Despite	his	marriages,	she	was	still	one	of	his	closest	confidantes.
Akbar	was,	as	usual,	riding	at	the	very	front	of	the	column.	Though	Salim	had	done	everything	his	father
had	 asked,	 acquiescing	 in	 all	 his	 marriage	 plans	 for	 him,	 the	 closeness	 he	 had	 felt	 to	 Akbar	 after	 the
victory	 over	 the	 Sultan	 of	 Kashmir	 had	 gradually	 ebbed.	 He	 had	 hoped	 that	 fathering	 Akbar’s	 first
grandson	might	have	made	Akbar	warm	towards	him	as	well	as	to	his	grandson.	To	Salim’s	continuing
frustration	and	disappointment,	his	father	still	seemed	too	preoccupied	with	the	expansion	of	his	empire
and	its	smooth	running,	as	well	as	with	his	philosophical	musings,	to	be	prepared	to	spend	much	time	with
his	eldest	son	or	to	involve	him	in	affairs	of	state.	He	was	almost	always	closeted	with	Abul	Fazl	who,
Salim	was	sure,	used	his	smooth,	flatterer’s	tongue	to	his	detriment.	Tasks	and	appointments	which	might
have	been	given	to	Salim	to	prepare	him	to	rule	one	day	had,	instead,	been	given	to	friends	of	Abul	Fazl,
who	was	even	now	sharing	his	father’s	howdah.	Some	court	rumours	claimed	that	he	had	grown	fat	on	the
bribes	he	had	received	for	recommending	his	friends,	though	others	said	that	his	corpulence	was	solely
accounted	for	by	his	excessive	appetite.	Salim	had	heard	Abul	Fazl’s	khutmagar	–	his	butler	–	boasting	to
one	of	his	own	servants	that	Abul	Fazl	consumed	thirty	pounds	of	food	a	day	and	even	then	occasionally
asked	for	a	nocturnal	snack.
Salim	pushed	thoughts	of	his	father	and	Abul	Fazl	from	his	mind	as	Suleiman	Beg,	who	was	riding	with
him,	adjusted	the	hangings	around	the	howdah	to	keep	out	the	rain	now	being	driven	almost	horizontally
by	the	strong	north	wind.	If	the	purpose	of	this	second	journey	to	Kashmir	was	different	from	the	first,	so
too	 was	 the	 spring	 weather,	 at	 least	 so	 far.	 It	 had	 scarcely	 stopped	 raining	 since	 they	 had	 entered	 the
series	 of	 mountain	 defiles	 and	 passes.	 The	 heads	 of	 the	 purple	 rhododendrons	 on	 the	 hillsides	 were
bowed	low	by	the	weight	of	raindrops.	As	Salim	looked	out	of	his	howdah,	he	could	see	water	streaming
down	some	overhanging	cliffs	to	the	right	before	splashing	into	the	puddles	on	the	muddy,	narrow	road
twisting	inexorably	upwards	towards	Kashmir.	On	the	left-hand	side	of	the	road,	the	land	dropped	almost
sheer	fifty	feet	to	the	jade-green	waters	of	the	river	below	which,	fed	by	snow	melt	as	well	as	rainwater,
was	flowing	fast	down	to	the	plains.
‘The	river	level	seems	to	rise	every	time	I	look	at	it,’	said	Suleiman	Beg.

O

‘Yes.	 It’ll	 be	 hard	 for	 those	 who’ve	 gone	 ahead	 to	 locate	 a	 camp	 site	 and	 erect	 the	 tents	 to	 find
somewhere	free	from	bogs	and	lying	water.’
Suddenly,	Salim	heard	a	crash,	followed	by	a	low	rumble	and	then	agonised	human	cries	from	round
the	sharp	bend	in	the	road	that	lay	just	ahead.	‘What	was	that?	Not	an	attack,	surely.’
‘No,	it	was	a	landslide,	I	think.’	Suleiman	Beg	stood	and	gestured	down	into	the	ravine.
Salim	followed	his	milk-brother’s	pointing	arm.	Mud	and	stones	seemed	to	have	partially	blocked	the
river,	which	was	already	backing	up.	Wasn’t	that	the	body	of	an	elephant	he	could	see?	‘Mahout,	 make
the	 elephant	 kneel!’	 he	 ordered.	 Even	 before	 the	 beast	 had	 settled	 fully	 on	 to	 its	 knees,	 both	 Salim	 and
Suleiman	Beg	had	jumped	to	the	ground	and	were	running	forward,	splashing	through	the	wet	yellow	mud
to	see	what	had	happened.
Rounding	the	bend,	Salim	was	deeply	relieved	to	see	that	all	the	elephants	carrying	his	wives	and	his
young	 sons	 were	 safe	 on	 the	 road.	 However,	 the	 problem	 was	 immediately	 apparent.	 Part	 of	 the	 rock
overhang	had	collapsed,	taking	about	thirty	feet	of	the	road	with	it	as	rocks	and	mud	slid	down	into	the
river	below.	The	body	of	one	elephant	protruded	from	beneath	the	landslide;	a	second	lay	half	in	and	half
out	 of	 the	 river,	 the	 water	 washing	 over	 it	 turning	 red	 with	 the	 beast’s	 blood.	 Its	 gilded	 howdah	 lay
nearby,	smashed	on	some	jagged	rocks	sticking	out	of	the	river.	Pushing	his	way	through	those	who	were
gathering	round	the	site	of	the	slide	and	looking	down,	Salim	asked,	‘Who	was	riding	on	these	elephants?’
‘Some	of	your	grandmother’s	waiting-women,’	one	onlooker	replied.
‘I	 regret	 to	 say	 one	 of	 them	 was	 your	 old	 nursemaid,	 Zubaida.	 Your	 grandmother	 thought	 the	 cool
mountain	air	would	be	good	for	her,’	added	a	thin	grizzled	old	man	as,	almost	audibly	creaking,	he	raised
himself	 from	 where	 he	 had	 been	 lying	 peering	 over	 the	 very	 edge.	 Despite	 the	 mud	 which	 soaked	 his
clothes	and	was	splashed	across	his	face	and	white	beard,	Salim	recognised	his	grandmother’s	steward.
‘I	think	I	was	able	to	see	where	her	howdah	landed.’
‘Do	you	mean	the	one	splintered	by	those	rocks	at	the	river’s	edge?’
‘No,	that	contained	four	other	of	your	grandmother’s	servants.	I	fear	they	are	all	dead.	I	myself	saw	one
of	their	bodies	washed	away	by	the	torrent,	face	down	and	arms	spread.	Zubaida’s	howdah	seems	to	have
been	torn	from	her	elephant	early	in	its	fall.	I	thought	I	could	see	it	caught	behind	some	trees	on	a	ledge
about	three-quarters	of	the	way	down,	but	more	of	the	mud	was	slipping	away	and	my	eyes	are	no	longer
good	.	.	.’
‘Hold	my	belt,	Suleiman	Beg,’	ordered	Salim	as	he	flung	himself	on	the	ground.	Oblivious	of	the	cold
wet	 mud	 soaking	 through	 his	 fine	 garments,	 he	 moved	 cautiously	 forward,	 propelling	 himself	 on	 his
elbows	to	a	point	where	his	head	and	shoulders	were	overlooking	the	slide.	Yes,	the	steward	was	right.
The	howdah	had	fallen	away	from	the	main	landslip	as	the	straps	securing	it	to	the	elephant	had	burst.	It
had	indeed	caught	against	some	scrubby	trees	on	a	ledge.	But	where	were	the	occupants?	The	debris	from
the	mudslide	blocked	his	view.
‘Hold	on	tight	to	me,	Suleiman	Beg.	I’ll	see	if	I	can	get	a	better	look.’	As	Salim	edged	further	forward,
he	heard	a	faint	cry	from	below.	Someone	was	alive.	What	was	left	of	the	sodden	overhang	might	give
way	at	any	moment.	If	those	who	had	fallen	into	the	ravine	were	to	be	rescued,	he	must	act	quickly.	At
first	it	looked	hopeless.	No	one	could	climb	down	there.	But	then	he	thought	he	could	make	out	a	route
that	might	just	be	possible.	‘Bring	me	a	rope	–	one	of	those	used	to	pull	bogged-down	carts	from	the	mud.
I	must	try	to	get	down	there.’
‘Let	me	go,’	said	Suleiman	Beg.
‘No,	it	should	be	me.	I	owe	it	to	Zubaida	to	be	the	one	to	go.	She	took	great	care	of	me	as	a	child.	I
remember	 she	 climbed	 a	 thorn	 tree	 to	 rescue	 me	 after	 I	 got	 stuck	 in	 it	 bird-nesting	 when	 I	 was	 about
three.’

Within	five	minutes	a	rope	had	been	brought	and	Salim	had	stripped	off	his	outer	garments	and	tied	the
rope	 firmly	 round	 his	 chest.	 ‘Hold	 on	 tight,’	 he	 shouted	 to	 Suleiman	 Beg.	 ‘Have	 further	 ropes	 ready	 to
lower	to	pull	survivors	up	with.’	Then	he	disappeared	over	the	edge.
For	about	the	first	ten	feet	or	so	he	picked	out	hand-	and	footholds	on	the	wet	rocks.	Then	he	came	to	a
place	where	mud	had	partially	covered	another	small	ledge.	As	he	put	his	foot	on	it,	some	of	the	loose
earth	and	stones	slipped	beneath	his	weight.	For	a	moment	he	lost	all	purchase.	Only	the	rope	tightening
under	his	armpits	saved	him	from	what	he	realised	with	a	shudder	would	inevitably	have	been	a	fatal	fall.
However,	as	he	swung	back	and	forth	on	the	rope	he	retained	the	presence	of	mind	to	propel	himself	back
towards	the	ledge	and	to	kick	away	some	of	the	mud	so	that	he	could	get	first	one	foot	and	then	the	other
on	to	the	base	rock	of	the	ledge.
After	 taking	 a	 deep	 breath,	 he	 looked	 down	 towards	 the	 considerably	 wider	 lower	 ledge	 where	 the
howdah	had	caught.	His	view	was	much	less	obstructed	now	and	he	could	see	that	there	were	two	figures,
both	women,	on	it.	One	was	lying	prone	on	the	ground	and	the	second,	who	from	her	long	grey	hair	he
recognised	as	Zubaida,	was	kneeling	beside	her.
‘Zubaida,’	Salim	shouted.	She	didn’t	hear	him	through	the	wind	and	rain.	‘Zubaida,’	he	yelled	again.
This	time	to	his	relief	the	woman	looked	up	and	waved	her	right	arm.	‘I	am	coming,’	Salim	called	down.
‘Keep	back	against	the	rock	wall	so	you	don’t	get	knocked	off	by	any	further	falls.’
Moments	later	he	saw	Zubaida	tugging	at	the	other	figure	in	an	attempt	to	pull	her	nearer	to	the	wall	too.
It	would	be	completely	beyond	Zubaida’s	strength,	but	he	knew	she	wouldn’t	give	up	and	seek	protection
only	for	herself.	He	had	no	time	to	lose.	Cautiously,	so	as	not	to	dislodge	any	more	material,	he	lowered
himself	carefully	down	the	wet	muddy	slope.	When	he	was	only	about	twelve	feet	vertically	and	perhaps
the	same	horizontally	from	the	two	women,	he	heard	a	noise	above	him	and	small	rocks	began	to	fall.	As
he	 looked	 up	 to	 see	 where	 they	 were	 coming	 from,	 a	 large	 stone	 struck	 the	 side	 of	 his	 face	 and	 he	 felt
blood	flow	into	his	mouth.
As	he	spat	out	the	metallic,	salty-tasting	fluid,	he	heard	Zubaida,	who	had	recognised	him,	shout,	‘Go
back,	Highness.	Save	yourself.	You	are	young.	Both	of	us	here	are	old	and	have	already	enjoyed	a	long
life.’	As	she	spoke,	more	stones	and	earth	fell	between	him	and	the	ledge.	Glancing	hastily	about,	Salim
saw	 some	 hand-	 and	 footholds	 created	 by	 fissures	 and	 protuberances	 in	 the	 rock	 which	 might	 take	 him
directly	above	the	ledge.	Quickly	but	carefully,	testing	each	hold	before	 he	 put	 his	 full	 weight	 on	 it,	 he
manoeuvred	along	until	he	was	in	a	position	from	which	he	could	jump	the	ten	feet	or	so	on	to	the	ledge.
He	did	so,	landing	with	a	knee-jarring	thump	next	to	Zubaida.
She	 was	 in	 a	 bad	 state,	 worse	 than	 he	 had	 hoped.	 A	 large	 jagged	 cut	 on	 her	 swollen	 temple	 was
bleeding	profusely	and	one	of	the	shattered	bones	of	her	left	forearm	was	protruding	bloodily	through	her
age-mottled	skin.	Blood	was	seeping	from	the	back	of	the	other	woman’s	head	and	staining	her	hennaed
hair.	 She	 was	 unconscious,	 if	 not	 dead.	 ‘You’ll	 both	 soon	 be	 out	 of	 here	 and	 safe	 in	 the	 hands	 of	 the
hakims,’	 Salim	 said	 with	 a	 little	 more	 confidence	 than	 he	 felt.	 He	 manoeuvred	 slowly	 forward	 to	 a
position	by	the	howdah	from	where	he	knew	those	on	the	road	above	could	see	him.	Then	he	waved	both
his	arms	above	his	head	in	the	agreed	signal	to	throw	further	ropes	down.	Soon,	two	ropes	snaked	through
the	air	towards	the	ledge.	Salim	grabbed	one	but	the	other	fell	too	far	away.	He	had	to	signal	twice	more
before	another	rope	finally	descended	within	his	reach.
He	tied	the	first	rope	round	Zubaida,	who	winced	only	when	he	accidentally	caught	her	damaged	arm.
‘Be	brave.’	Salim	smiled	encouragingly	at	her.	‘When	I	give	the	signal	those	on	the	road	will	pull	you	up
on	the	rope.	Use	your	feet	to	push	yourself	away	from	the	rocks.’
‘Yes,	Highness,	I	understand.’
‘When	you	reach	the	top,	tell	them	to	pull	on	both	my	rope	and	the	remaining	one	at	the	same	time.	I

will	go	up	with	your	companion.’
Zubaida	nodded	and	Salim	moved	again	to	the	shattered	howdah	to	signal	for	his	old	nursemaid	to	be
hauled	back	up.	Soon,	to	Salim’s	great	relief,	she	was	ascending	the	rock	face,	obediently	pushing	with
her	bare	feet	just	as	he	had	instructed.
As	 she	 disappeared	 from	 his	 view,	 Salim	 went	 over	 to	 the	 second	 woman,	 who	 somewhat	 to	 his
surprise	was	still	breathing.	As	he	tied	the	rope	around	her,	he	saw	her	eyelids	flicker.	Then	he	quickly
resecured	his	own	rope	about	himself	and	lifted	the	woman	in	his	arms.	A	few	moments	later	he	felt	the
ropes	 tauten.	 Slowly	 they	 began	 to	 be	 hoisted	 up,	 Salim	 using	 his	 feet	 to	 keep	 them	 clear	 of	 the	 rocks
when	he	could.	He	couldn’t	prevent	himself	being	swung	heavily	against	one	overhang,	grazing	his	back
through	 his	 thin	 tunic,	 but	 he	 was	 soon	 at	 the	 top,	 safe	 if	 bruised	 and	 blood-	 and	 mud-stained.	 As	 the
hakims	 took	 the	 two	 elderly	 women	 away	 on	 makeshift	 stretchers,	 the	 first	 person	 Salim	 saw	 striding
towards	 him	 was	 his	 father,	 the	 crowds	 parting	 before	 him.	 He	 had	 a	 broad	 smile	 on	 his	 face	 as	 he
extended	his	arms	to	embrace	his	son.
‘Salim,	I	am	proud	of	you.	Your	strength	is	now	the	equal	of	mine.’
To	his	son,	every	word	was	as	precious	as	gold.
A	soft	wind	was	blowing	through	the	beds	of	roses	and	some	of	their	red	petals	were	falling	to	the	ground
as	 three	 months	 later	 Akbar	 and	 Salim	 walked	 side	 by	 side	 through	 the	 Nasim	 Bagh	 near	 the	 Kashmiri
capital	of	Srinagar.	The	gardens	had	been	laid	out	on	Akbar’s	orders	only	twelve	months	previously	on
the	west	bank	of	the	Dal	lake,	whose	blue	waters	lapped	the	edge	of	the	lowest	of	the	gardens’	series	of
descending	terraces.	It	must,	thought	Salim,	be	one	of	the	most	beautiful	places	in	the	world.
As	 if	 sensing	 what	 his	 son	 was	 thinking,	 Akbar	 said,	 ‘The	 Persians	 at	 the	 court	 boast	 that	 their
homeland	has	the	most	beautiful	gardens,	the	closest	on	earth	to	the	charbaghs,	the	gardens	of	Paradise,
which	 the	 Koran	 describes	 as	 the	 reward	 of	 the	 faithful	 in	 heaven.	 However,	 for	 me,	 the	 whole	 of
Kashmir	is	one	great	garden	of	Paradise	with	its	meadows	carpeted	in	spring	by	the	mauve	flowers	of	the
saffron	crocus,	its	babbling	brooks,	its	tumbling	waterfalls	and	these	wonderful	hills	and	lake.’
Salim	 thought,	 not	 for	 the	 first	 time,	 that	 he	 had	 never	 seen	 his	 father	 as	 relaxed	 as	 when	 he	 was	 in
Kashmir.	Although	Akbar	still	dealt	daily	with	the	despatches	brought	by	post	messengers	from	Hindustan
and	often	inspected	the	construction	of	the	fast-rising	Hari	Parvat	fort	in	Srinagar,	he	still	seemed	to	have
more	time	to	talk	to	members	of	his	family.	Perhaps,	thought	Salim,	that	was	because	almost	immediately
after	they	had	arrived	in	Srinagar	his	father	had	despatched	Abul	Fazl	back	to	Lahore	to	deal	with	some
reported	problems	with	the	running	of	the	imperial	administration.
‘I	was	just	thinking	the	same,	Father.	It	is	good	to	be	among	breezes	and	green	meadows	instead	of	the
heat	and	rain	of	the	monsoon	in	Hindustan.	It	makes	me	feel	more	alive.’	Salim	paused,	pleased	to	share
his	father’s	mood,	and	then	went	on,	‘While	we’ve	been	here	I’ve	become	more	and	more	interested	in
nature.	I’ve	had	some	of	the	artists	draw	accurate	pictures	of	crocuses	and	other	flowers	much	larger	than
life	so	that	I	can	see	all	the	intricate	details	of	their	make-up.	I	have	even	had	scholars	dissect	the	wings
of	birds	to	see	if	they	can	understand	how	they	fly.’
‘Your	grandmother	has	told	me	of	your	researches.	I	would	like	to	see	the	drawings	myself.	Kashmir
has	been	good	for	all	of	us.	It	has	shown	me	not	only	how	courageous	you	are	but	how	strong	your	mind
is.’
Salim	said	nothing	for	a	while	as	the	two	continued	to	walk	down	through	the	terraces	of	the	Nasim
Bagh	 towards	 the	 glinting	 waters	 of	 the	 Dal	 lake.	 Then,	 emboldened	 by	 these	 moments	 of	 intimacy,	 he
asked,	 ‘When	 we	 return	 to	 Lahore,	 may	 I	 attend	 your	 council	 meetings,	 whether	 civil	 or	 military,	 more

often	so	that	I	can	better	understand	how	our	empire	works?’
‘I	will	certainly	think	about	it.	I	shall	consult	Abul	Fazl	as	to	when	it	might	be	most	helpful	for	you	to
do	so.’
Abul	Fazl,	always	Abul	Fazl,	thought	Salim.	He	said	nothing,	but	it	was	as	if	a	shadow	had	passed	over
the	warm	late	summer	sun.

Chapter	21

‘A	Riband	in	the	Cap	of	Royalty’

his	is	good	news.	We	should	celebrate,’	said	Suleiman	Beg.	‘Perhaps	it	will	be	a	third	son	for	you	in
addition	to	Khusrau	and	Parvez.’
‘Perhaps.’
‘What’s	the	matter?	You	look	as	if	your	father	had	appointed	you	inspector	of	the	Lahore	latrines,	rather
than	a	man	who’s	just	learned	that	his	favourite	wife	is	pregnant.’
Suleiman	 Beg	 could	 always	 lighten	 his	 mood,	 Salim	 thought.	 ‘You’re	 right,	 and	 I	 am	 pleased.	 So	 is
Jodh	Bai.	It	was	hard	for	her	to	see	me	with	two	sons	already,	neither	of	them	hers.’
‘And	I’m	right,	aren’t	I?	She	is	your	favourite.’
‘I	suppose	so.	At	least	she	can	always	make	me	laugh.	Like	you,	she	knows	my	moods	and	can	tease	me
out	 of	 them.	 And	 unlike	 Man	 Bai	 or	 some	 of	 my	 other	 wives	 she	 never	 complains	 that	 I	 don’t	 spend
enough	time	with	her.’
‘What	is	it	then?	Why	the	reluctance	to	rejoice?’
Salim’s	jaw	tightened	as	he	tried	to	answer	that	question	as	much	for	himself	as	his	milk-brother.	‘It’s
good	to	be	the	father	of	sons,	of	course	it	is.	But	what	will	I	have	to	offer	them?	The	same	purposeless	life
that	I	lead?	While	we	were	with	my	father	in	Kashmir	I	thought	he	had	changed	towards	me.	He	seemed	to
want	my	opinions,	but	since	we’ve	returned	to	Lahore	he	ignores	me	again.	It’s	all	Abul	Fazl.	He	sits	at
my	father’s	right	ear	dripping	unctuous	words	and	I’m	surer	than	ever	he	is	to	blame.	He	wants	to	exclude
me	and	my	half-brothers	because	he	sees	us	as	rivals	for	influence	with	my	father.’
Suleiman	 Beg	 shrugged.	 ‘Perhaps	 your	 father	 thinks	 you’re	 still	 too	 young	 to	 take	 a	 hand	 in
government.’
‘I’m	a	grown	man.	I’m	a	father.	I’ve	proved	my	courage	in	battle.	I’ve	been	patient	and	dutiful.	What
more	does	he	want?	Sometimes	I	think	he	excludes	me	from	important	debates	on	purpose.’
‘Why	should	he	do	that?’
‘Because	 he	 doesn’t	 know	 whether	 he	 wants	 me	 to	 succeed	 him.	 He’s	 reluctant	 to	 give	 me	 any	 real
power	or	responsibility	because	he	fears	that	will	be	a	sign	to	me	–	and	to	others	–	that	I	am	his	chosen
heir.’
‘You	don’t	know	that.	It	might	just	be	that	he’s	wary	of	giving	up	any	power	to	anyone.	How	old	is	he?’
‘He’ll	be	forty-nine	in	October.’
‘There	 you	 are	 then.	 Though	 he	 looks	 so	 vigorous	 and	 strong	 he’s	 not	 a	 young	 man	 any	 more.	 In	 his
heart	he’ll	know	that	and	he	probably	resents	you	or	anyone	who	might	one	day	succeed	him	–	he’s	like
the	old	tiger	driven	from	his	haunts	by	a	younger	male.’
‘How	come	you	think	you’re	so	knowledgeable?’
Suleiman	Beg	shrugged,	then	grinned,	showing	very	white	teeth.	‘My	father’s	almost	exactly	the	same
age	and	he’s	the	same.	He	does	nothing	but	find	fault	with	me,	never	asks	my	opinion	about	anything.	I	just
keep	out	of	his	way.	I	wish	your	father	would	post	him	back	to	Bengal.’
‘Perhaps	you’re	right.	Perhaps	my	father	doesn’t	intentionally	mean	to	slight	me.	He’s	certainly	shown

‘T

no	more	favour	to	my	half-brothers.	Murad	and	Daniyal	lead	the	same	aimless	lives	as	I	do.’
‘But	they	continue	to	find	ways	of	solacing	themselves.’
‘What	do	you	mean?’
Suleiman	arched	an	eyebrow.	‘Surely	you’ve	heard	the	latest	about	their	parties?	Sometimes	they’re	too
drunk	to	get	themselves	to	bed.	Their	attendants	often	have	to	carry	them	back	to	their	apartments	and	two
weeks	ago	Murad	nearly	drowned	when	he	collapsed	into	one	of	the	water	channels	in	the	garden.’
‘Doesn’t	their	behaviour	make	you	understand	how	I	feel?	I	don’t	want	my	sons	to	lead	empty	lives,	not
knowing	what	the	future	holds,	and	as	a	result	succumb	to	the	temptations	that	self-seeking	people	dangle
before	princes	for	their	own	purposes.	I	want	to	be	emperor	and	give	my	sons	the	chance	of	fighting	by	my
side	as	we	expand	and	strengthen	our	empire.’
‘You’re	too	impatient.	Your	father	may	have	many	years	to	live.’
‘I	pray	he	does.	If	you	think	I	want	my	father	out	of	this	world	and	in	Paradise	you’re	wrong.	But	I	can’t
live	through	many	more	years	like	this,	with	no	way	of	achieving	anything.	I	might	just	as	well	be	one	of
my	concubines	lying	on	cushions	all	day	and	growing	plump	on	sweetmeats,	or	one	of	the	fat	eunuchs	who
never	draw	a	dagger	or	a	sword.	I’m	a	young	man,	a	warrior,	I	need	opportunities	now.	If	my	father	shuts
me	out	I	have	nothing.	It’s	not	like	the	days	of	our	ancestors	when	a	Moghul	prince	could	ride	off	in	search
of	new	lands	where	he	could	carve	out	a	kingdom	for	himself	as	my	great-grandfather	Babur	did.	In	his
lifetime	he	ruled	Ferghana,	Samarkand	and	Kabul	before	he	came	near	Hindustan.	When	he	was	half	my
age	he’d	already	made	his	mark	on	the	world.’
‘Highness	.	.	.’	It	was	one	of	Salim’s	qorchis.	‘Your	wife	Jodh	Bai	asks	that	you	go	to	her.’
Salim	 nodded,	 and	 at	 the	 thought	 of	 Jodh	 Bai,	 her	 endearingly	 round	 little	 face	 even	 rounder	 with
happiness	as	she’d	told	him	the	news	of	her	pregnancy	earlier	that	day,	his	own	grim	expression	softened.
He	should	be	glad	of	what	he	had.	And	Suleiman	Beg	was	right.	Just	as	so	many	others	had	counselled
him	–	Shaikh	Salim	Chishti,	who	now	lay	in	a	marble	tomb	in	the	courtyard	of	the	mosque	in	Fatehpur
Sikri,	and	his	grandmother,	and	his	great-aunt	–	he	must	learn	patience.
‘I	will	go	to	her	straight	away.	Suleiman	Beg,	when	I	return	we’ll	celebrate,	as	you	suggest.’
‘And	 don’t	 forget	 one	 thing	 you	 already	 have	 over	 your	 father.	 It	 took	 him	 far	 longer	 than	 you	 to
produce	heirs	.	.	.’
Akbar	held	his	new	grandson	in	his	arms.	‘I	name	you	Khurram,	meaning	“joyous”.	May	your	life	be	so
and	may	you	bring	joy	to	all	around	you.	But	more	than	that,	may	you	make	our	empire	yet	greater.’	Akbar
smiled	down	at	Khurram’s	tiny	face,	wizened	like	all	newborn	babies’,	and	tightened	his	grip	on	the	small
squirming	 body	 wrapped	 in	 green	 velvet	 that	 Salim	 had	 just	 placed	 in	 his	 arms.	 Then	 he	 looked	 up	 to
address	his	courtiers	and	commanders.	‘The	court	astronomers	tell	me	that	the	conjunction	of	the	planets
at	the	moment	of	Khurram’s	birth	three	days	ago	was	the	same	as	at	the	birth	of	my	great	ancestor,	Timur.
That	in	itself	is	highly	auspicious,	but	there	is	more:	this	is	the	millennium	year	of	our	Islamic	calendar,
while	the	month	of	my	grandson’s	birth	is	the	same	as	that	of	the	Prophet	Muhammad.	This	child	will,	as
Abul	 Fazl	 here	 has	 already	 recorded	 in	 the	 chronicles,	 be	 “a	 riband	 in	 the	 cap	 of	 royalty	 and	 more
resplendent	than	the	sun”.’
Salim’s	 face	 flushed	 with	 pride	 as	 he	 looked	 at	 Khurram.	 His	 father’s	 delight	 in	 this	 new	 grandson
seemed	 to	 know	 no	 bounds.	 Just	 a	 few	 hours	 after	 the	 birth,	 having	 heard	 the	 astronomers’	 excited
comparisons	 with	 Timur’s	 birth,	 he	 had	 sent	 Salim	 a	 pair	 of	 matched	 black	 stallions	 and	 fine	 silks	 and
perfume	 to	 Jodh	 Bai.	 The	 tenderness	 on	 his	 face	 as	 he	 held	 Khurram	 was	 something	 Salim	 had	 never
witnessed	and	filled	him	with	renewed	hope.	Surely	this	would	bind	him	and	his	father	closer	together

and	help	to	assure	his	own	succession.	It	seemed	that	God	himself	had	spoken	by	bringing	Khurram	into
the	world	on	such	a	day.
Looking	 at	 his	 son	 in	 his	 father’s	 arms,	 Salim	 wished	 he	 could	 roll	 the	 years	 forward	 and	 see	 what
those	wrinkled	features,	those	tiny	limbs,	would	one	day	become.	If	the	stargazers	were	correct	this	child
would	be	a	great	warrior,	a	conqueror,	a	ruler	whose	name	would	pass	down	through	time	when	others
were	forgotten.
Akbar	was	raising	jewelled	hands	to	signal	he	had	more	to	say.	‘Because	the	omens	surrounding	the
birth	of	this	child	are	so	special	I	have	decided	that	I	myself	will	rear	him.’
Salim	stared	at	Akbar	as	he	struggled	to	take	in	what	his	father	was	saying.	Surely	he	didn’t	mean	.	.	.?
But	 as	 he	 continued	 to	 listen	 to	 Akbar’s	 calm	 but	 authoritative	 voice,	 his	 father’s	 intentions	 were
becoming	clearer	by	the	moment.
‘Prince	Khurram	will	be	placed	in	the	care	of	one	of	my	wives,	Rukhiya	Begum,	in	my	haram	so	that	I
may	 see	 him	 at	 any	 hour	 of	 the	 day	 or	 night.	 As	 he	 begins	 to	 grow	 I	 will	 appoint	 special	 tutors	 to
superintend	his	education	but	will	also	take	a	hand	myself.’
Didn’t	his	father	even	trust	him	to	bring	up	his	own	son?	Salim	stared	at	the	ground,	willing	himself	not
to	look	at	Akbar	because	of	what	he	might	say	or	do.	The	most	senior	members	of	the	court	were	present,
he	told	himself,	driving	the	nails	of	one	hand	into	the	palm	of	another	so	hard	that	he	thought	he	had	drawn
blood.	Causing	a	disturbance	was	unthinkable.	He	tried	to	steady	his	thoughts	and	to	control	his	breathing,
which	had	suddenly	become	jerky,	as	if	he	could	not	draw	in	enough	air.	Then	another	thought	struck	him
with	 sickening	 force.	 Was	 his	 father	 thinking	 of	 eventually	 naming	 Khurram	 as	 his	 heir?	 Surely	 not	 .	 .	 .
Glancing	sideways	he	caught	Abul	Fazl	watching	him.	The	chronicler’s	small	eyes	looked	interested,	as	if
assessing	 how	 Salim	 was	 taking	 the	 news.	 What	 role	 had	 Abul	 Fazl	 played	 in	 this?	 Salim	 suddenly
wondered.	Was	he	encouraging	Akbar	to	favour	Khurram	to	extend	the	length	of	his	time	in	power?	He
might	 seek	 to	 be	 regent	 if	 Khurram	 came	 to	 the	 throne	 in	 childhood.	 At	 the	 thought,	 such	 red-hot	 anger
spurted	through	Salim	that	it	was	all	he	could	do	not	to	pull	his	dagger	from	his	sash,	spring	forward	and
draw	the	blade	across	Abul	Fazl’s	fleshy	throat.
But	he	would	not	give	the	chronicler	the	satisfaction	of	seeing	how	much	his	father	had	hurt	him.	He
forced	 his	 features	 to	 look	 composed,	 but	 all	 the	 time	 his	 mind	 was	 racing,	 trying	 to	 work	 out	 the
implications	 of	 Akbar’s	 theft	 of	 his	 son.	 It	 was	 little	 consolation	 that	 Khurram	 would	 have	 the	 best	 of
everything	 and	 Rukhiya	 Begum	 was	 a	 kind	 woman.	 Salim	 had	 known	 her	 all	 his	 life.	 Plain-faced	 and
grey-haired,	she	was	Akbar’s	cousin	–	the	daughter	of	his	long-dead	uncle	Hindal	–	and	at	least	Akbar’s
age.	She	was	also	childless.	Her	marriage	to	Akbar	–	as	with	his	marriages	to	so	many	in	his	vast	haram
–	 had	 probably	 barely	 been	 consummated.	 No,	 he	 need	 have	 no	 fears	 for	 Khurram.	 The	 victims	 were
himself	and	Jodh	Bai,	who	would	be	deprived	of	daily	contact	with	their	son	.	.	.
At	the	thought	of	Jodh	Bai,	Salim’s	jaw	tightened.	She	had	waited	a	long	time	for	a	child,	and	to	have
him	 given	 completely	 into	 the	 care	 of	 another	 would	 hurt	 her	 badly.	 Rukhiya	 Begum	 would	 appoint	 the
child’s	milk-mothers.	Rukhiya	Begum	would	be	the	one	to	watch	Khurram’s	daily	progress.	As	soon	as
the	 celebration	 feast	 was	 over,	 Salim	 slipped	 away	 to	 find	 Jodh	 Bai	 in	 the	 haram.	 Her	 eyes	 were
reddened	with	tears	but	she	was	not	hysterical	as	Man	Bai	would	have	been	had	the	newborn	Khusrau
been	 taken	 from	 her.	 She	 was	 sitting	 quietly	 on	 a	 yellow	 brocade	 divan,	 hands	 clasped	 together.	 Salim
stooped	and	kissed	her.	‘I’m	sorry.	I	didn’t	know	what	my	father	was	planning.’
For	a	moment	Jodh	Bai	said	nothing.	When	she	did	speak,	her	voice	was	calm.	‘Your	father	has	sent	me
another	gift.’	Opening	her	hands	she	revealed	what	she	had	been	clutching	–	a	magnificent	gold	chain	set
with	glowing	rubies	and	large	pearls.	Armies	had	fought	for	less.	‘It’s	beautiful,	but	I	would	rather	the
emperor	 had	 left	 me	 my	 son.’	 She	 let	 the	 shining	 necklace	 trickle	 through	 her	 fingers	 on	 to	 the	 indigo

carpet	beneath	her	feet,	where	it	lay	like	a	jewelled	snake.
‘One	day,	I	promise	you,	I	will	find	a	way	of	making	amends	for	this	–	and	so	will	Khurram.	He	won’t
always	 be	 a	 boy	 in	 his	 grandfather’s	 thrall	 and	 the	 bonds	 between	 a	 mother	 and	 her	 son	 are	 strong,
whatever	 the	 circumstances.’	 As	 he	 himself	 knew,	 thought	 Salim,	 as	 an	 image	 of	 Hirabai’s	 proud	 face,
softening	as	she	looked	at	him,	came	into	his	mind.
‘Is	 there	 nothing	 we	 can	 do?’	 Jodh	 Bai	 asked,	 then	 shook	 her	 head	 as	 if	 impatient	 with	 herself.	 ‘Of
course	there	isn’t.	Your	father	is	the	emperor	and	it	is	a	great	honour	that	he	should	wish	to	bring	up	our
child.	I	shouldn’t	complain.’
Grief	 sat	 oddly	 on	 her	 round	 face,	 usually	 so	 alive	 with	 humour,	 and	 Salim	 felt	 tears	 prick	 his	 own
eyelids	–	tears	for	her,	tears	of	frustration	at	his	powerlessness.	But	he	also	felt	a	new	resolve.	Hide	your
feelings,	he	told	himself;	be	patient.	Your	time	will	come	.	.	.	You	will	rule.
But	as	Salim	reflected	on	those	words	over	the	months	ahead	they	seemed	to	him	ever	more	empty.	His
situation	had	less	to	do	with	patience	than	with	powerlessness,	he	realised.	Every	day	he	had	to	live	with
the	 knowledge	 that	 there	 was	 nothing	 he	 could	 do.	 He	 was	 entirely	 dependent	 on	 Akbar,	 whose	 delight
and	interest	in	his	grandson	showed	no	sign	of	diminishing.	Salim	knew	he	should	be	pleased	his	father
loved	Khurram	so	much	.	.	.	that	he	mustn’t	resent	the	fact	that	Akbar	had	never	responded	to	him	like	that.
But	it	was	hard.	So	was	having	to	endure	the	sight	of	Khurram,	on	his	rare	visits	to	Jodh	Bai,	twisting	in
her	unfamiliar	arms	and	bawling	to	be	returned	to	the	milk-mother	Rukhiya	Begum	had	appointed.	Jodh
Bai	tried	to	hide	her	sorrow	but	it	never	left	her,	he	was	sure.
All	the	time,	Salim’s	thoughts	had	kept	returning	to	Abul	Fazl,	surely	the	author	of	so	many	things	that
had	happened	to	frustrate	his	hopes.	And	if	he’d	needed	any	further	proof	that	this	man	was	his	enemy,
he’d	just	received	it,	Salim	thought	as	on	a	warm	summer’s	day	he	strode	towards	Abul	Fazl’s	apartments
in	the	Lahore	fort.
‘Highness,	you	honour	me	by	your	visit.	I	was	just	recording	in	the	chronicle	His	Majesty’s	departure
to	Agra	to	inspect	the	rebuilding	of	the	fort.’	Abul	Fazl	rose	to	his	feet	as	Salim	was	ushered	in.	A	polite
smile	was	spread	across	his	fleshy	features	but	the	small	eyes	looked	watchful.
‘I’m	surprised	you	haven’t	gone	with	him.’
‘His	Majesty	will	be	away	for	nearly	two	months.	He	wished	me	to	remain	in	Lahore	so	I	could	report
anything	 of	 which	 he	 needed	 to	 be	 aware.’	 Abul	 Fazl’s	 smooth,	 reasonable	 tone	 and	 his	 even	 smoother
smile	never	failed	to	set	Salim	on	edge	but	for	once	he	felt	no	compulsion	to	hide	his	feelings.
‘I	have	just	heard	that	my	half-brother	Murad	has	been	appointed	Governor	of	Malwa	and	Gujarat.’
‘Indeed,	Highness.	He	is	to	leave	Lahore	to	take	up	his	new	position	in	a	month’s	time.’
‘That	is	the	post	I	asked	my	father	to	give	me.	He	told	me	he	would	think	about	it.	What	happened?’
Abul	Fazl	spread	his	hands.	‘His	Majesty	can	best	answer	that	question.	You	know	that	he	appoints	all
the	governors	of	our	provinces	himself.’
‘I	can’t	ask	him.	As	you	yourself	observed,	he	isn’t	here.	That’s	why	I’m	asking	you.	You	are	his	mouth
and	ears.	I	thought	you	knew	everything.’
Salim’s	tone	was	contemptuous.	Yet	he	could	see	that	instead	of	being	offended,	Abul	Fazl	was	battling
with	 his	 vanity.	 It	 hurt	 the	 man	 to	 pretend	 he	 didn’t	 know	 what	 was	 going	 on	 and	 it	 seemed	 he	 was
prepared	to	lose	that	battle	without	too	much	of	a	struggle.	His	heavy-featured	face	eased	into	a	smile.
‘What	I	can	say	is	that	His	Majesty	decided	that	Prince	Murad	would	be	well	suited	to	the	post.’
‘Better	suited	than	me?’	If	the	increasingly	colourful	stories	circulating	the	court	were	true,	Murad	was
often	too	drunk	to	stand	unaided.

‘I	 am	 sure	 Your	 Highness	 would	 also	 make	 an	 excellent	 governor,’	 said	 Abul	 Fazl,	 evading	 the
question.
‘Did	my	father	ask	your	advice	on	the	appointment?’
Abul	Fazl	hesitated	a	moment.	‘As	I	said	before,	His	Majesty	takes	such	decisions	himself.	My	role	is
simply	to	record	them.’
‘I	don’t	believe	you.’
‘Highness?’	 Abul	 Fazl	 looked	 truly	 shocked.	 It	 occurred	 to	 Salim	 that	 over	 the	 many	 years	 the
chronicler	 had	 served	 his	 father,	 they	 had	 almost	 never	 been	 alone	 together.	 The	 knowledge	 that	 Akbar
was	far	from	the	court	was	liberating	and	Salim	persisted	with	what	he	had	started,	not	just	the	frustration
of	this	latest	matter	of	the	governorship	but	the	resentments	and	suspicions	of	years	urging	him	on.
‘I	 said	 that	 I	 don’t	 believe	 you.	 My	 father	 consults	 you	 on	 everything	 and	 will	 have	 done	 so	 over
appointing	a	governor	in	Malwa	and	Gujarat.’
Abul	 Fazl’s	 smile	 faded.	 ‘My	 discussions	 with	 your	 father	 are	 confidential.	 It	 would	 be	 a	 breach	 of
trust	for	me	to	say	more.	You	should	know	that,	Highness.’
There	 was	 no	 unctuousness	 now	 in	 Abul	 Fazl’s	 voice	 and	 for	 the	 first	 time	 Salim	 sensed	 how
formidable	this	man	was.	But	he	would	not	be	deterred.	‘I	know	my	father	holds	you	in	high	esteem.’
‘As	I	do	him.	I	am	his	loyallest	subject.’	Abul	Fazl’s	voice	was	steely.
‘But	 shouldn’t	 your	 loyalty	 extend	 to	 the	 rest	 of	 my	 father’s	 family?’	 Salim	 seized	 Abul	 Fazl	 by	 the
shoulders	 and	 stared	 him	 in	 the	 face.	 ‘I	 am	 his	 eldest	 son,	 but	 ever	 since	 I	 began	 to	 grow	 up	 you’ve
schemed	to	keep	us	apart.	If	it	wasn’t	for	you,	my	father	would	have	invited	me	to	the	meetings	of	his	war
council	as	a	matter	of	course.	You	encouraged	him	to	exclude	me.	Don’t	deny	it.’
Abul	Fazl	didn’t	flinch	but	replied	in	a	level	tone,	looking	Salim	steadily	in	the	eye,	‘I	have	always
given	His	Majesty	the	best	advice	I	could.	If	you	want	to	know	the	truth,	he	didn’t	invite	you	because	he
didn’t	think	your	presence	would	be	useful.	As	he	himself	told	me,	you	disappoint	him.’
Salim	let	go	of	Abul	Fazl.	Those	brief	but	brutal	words	wounded	him	more	than	any	weapon	could	ever
do.	Hadn’t	he	always	feared	he’d	never	live	up	to	his	father’s	expectations,	however	hard	he	tried	.	.	.?
Suddenly,	just	as	when	Akbar	announced	he	was	going	to	bring	up	Khurram,	Salim	became	aware	of	Abul
Fazl’s	hungry	scrutiny,	as	if	he	wanted	to	observe	every	painful	emotion	passing	through	him.	He	must	not
let	 Abul	 Fazl	 feed	 his	 fears,	 nor	 must	 he	 show	 him	 his	 comments	 had	 hurt.	 Pulling	 himself	 together,	 he
said,	‘You	have	always	tried	to	create	mischief	between	me	and	my	father,	and	if	you	hadn’t	always	been
there	at	his	side	he	and	I	would	have	got	to	understand	one	another	better.	You	may	be	loyal	to	him,	as	you
say,	but	only	because	that	best	serves	your	interests.	Know	this.	I	see	you	for	what	you	are,	and	the	day
when	my	father	sees	it	as	well	will	be	a	good	one.’
They	were	eyeing	each	other	now	like	enemies	on	the	battlefield,	but	Salim	knew	that	to	strike	Abul
Fazl	 would	 only	 strengthen	 the	 chronicler’s	 position	 when	 he	 reported	 their	 confrontation	 to	 his	 father.
Perhaps	 what	 he’d	 already	 said	 had	 been	 unwise	 but	 he	 couldn’t	 regret	 it.	 From	 now	 on	 the	 chronicler
might	be	more	wary	of	the	emperor’s	eldest	son.	As	for	himself,	he	would	watch	Abul	Fazl	to	find	some
evidence	 of	 corruption	 and	 self-interest,	 and	 when	 he	 found	 it	 he	 would	 act.	 Turning	 on	 his	 heel,	 he
walked	quickly	from	the	apartment	out	into	the	sunlit	palace	courtyard.	Glancing	back,	he	saw	Abul	Fazl
watching	him	from	the	casement	window.

Chapter	22

The	Battlements	of	Agra

hat’s	the	matter?	You’ve	been	preoccupied	all	afternoon.	I	thought	you’d	have	so	much	to	tell	me.’
‘I	have.	Abul	Fazl	will	soon	be	returning	to	court	from	the	tour	of	inspection	in	Delhi	my	father
sent	him	on,’	said	Salim	to	Suleiman	Beg,	as	they	rode	slowly	into	the	shallows	of	the	Ravi	river	to
allow	the	steaming	horses	they	had	just	raced	along	its	banks	to	cool	off.	Suleiman	Beg	had	been	with	his
father	in	the	Punjab	and	they	hadn’t	seen	one	another	for	some	months.
‘So	what?	You’re	obsessed	with	him.’
‘I	have	good	cause.’
‘Just	because	he’s	ambitious	and	relishes	being	your	father’s	confidant	doesn’t	make	him	your	enemy.’
‘He	 fears	 me	 –	 and	 my	 brothers	 –	 as	 rivals,	 I’m	 sure	 of	 it.	 That’s	 why	 he	 reports	 every	 fault,	 every
indiscretion	of	Murad	and	Daniyal	to	my	father	–	don’t	interrupt	me,	Suleiman	Beg,	I	know	he	does.	I’ve
heard	him	do	it.’
‘Perhaps	he	regards	it	as	his	duty.	Your	brothers	are	idiots.’
‘That’s	not	the	point.	What	matters	is	that	he	tries	to	damage	me	as	well	in	my	father’s	eyes.’
‘He’s	 never	 told	 your	 father	 about	 your	 argument	 with	 him	 .	 .	 .	 not	 in	 the	 whole	 two	 years	 since	 it
happened,	has	he?’
‘My	father’s	never	said	anything.	But	maybe	Abul	Fazl	thought	it	didn’t	reflect	well	on	him	either.’
‘Or	perhaps	he’s	learned	his	lesson.’
‘No.	 He	 still	 tries	 to	 exclude	 me	 from	 everything.	 You	 weren’t	 at	 court	 when	 my	 father	 told	 me	 that
having	conquered	Sind	he	intended	to	send	a	Moghul	army	to	seize	Kandahar.’	Salim’s	horse	lowered	its
head	to	drink	the	muddy	river	water	and	he	gently	stroked	its	sweat-mottled	neck.	‘I	begged	my	father	to
let	me	go	on	the	campaign	as	one	of	the	commanders	.	.	.	I	argued	that	I’d	proved	myself	in	Kashmir	and
deserved	 further	 opportunities.	 I	 even	 said	 it	 was	 a	 matter	 of	 family	 honour	 –	 we	 lost	 Kandahar	 to	 the
Persians	when	my	grandfather	Humayun	died	and	it	was	right	that	his	eldest	grandson	should	help	win	it
back.’
‘And?’
‘He	was	so	full	of	his	victory	in	Sind	I	thought	he	was	going	to	agree	but	then	he	said	he	wished	to
consult	his	war	council.	It	was	Abul	Fazl	who	next	day	brought	me	my	father’s	decision	–	that	I	lacked	the
experience	 for	 such	 a	 distant	 campaign.	 My	 father’s	 message	 ended	 with	 the	 usual	 words	 –	 “don’t	 be
impatient”.	But	I	know	whose	message	it	really	was.’
‘You	don’t	know	that.	Maybe	your	father	was	concerned	for	your	safety.’
‘Or	maybe	Abul	Fazl	didn’t	want	me	to	share	in	the	glory	.	.	.	Nearly	every	day	post	riders	have	been
bringing	reports	of	the	successful	advance	of	our	troops,	of	how	they	have	already	subdued	the	Baluchi
tribes	infesting	the	mountain	passes	leading	to	Kandahar	and	are	advancing	on	the	city	itself.	Last	night
came	 a	 despatch	 from	 Abdul	 Rahman,	 my	 father’s	 khan-i-khanan,	 that	 the	 Persian	 commander	 of
Kandahar	was	about	to	surrender.’
‘That’s	wonderful	news.	If	it’s	true,	it	means	your	father	has	extended	the	empire’s	northern	frontiers

‘W

yet	again	.	.	.	he	now	rules	from	Kandahar	down	to	the	Deccan	in	the	south,	from	Bengal	in	the	east	to	Sind
in	the	west	.	.	.	Our	forces	are	invincible.	Who	can	challenge	the	Moghuls	now?’	But	the	enthusiasm	on
Suleiman	Beg’s	face	died	as	he	took	in	Salim’s	bleak	expression.
‘It	is	good	news,	of	course	it	is.	My	father	is	a	great	man	–	I	know	it	and	everybody	else	keeps	telling
me	 it.	 He	 has	 raised	 our	 dynasty	 to	 heights	 known	 to	 no	 other.	 But	 it	 would	 have	 been	 even	 better	 if	 I
could	have	had	a	share	in	the	action	instead	of	sitting	around	always	hoping	for	a	chance	to	prove	myself
that	 never	 comes	 .	 .	 .’	 So	 saying,	 Salim	 yanked	 his	 reins	 so	 hard	 his	 horse	 whinnied	 in	 protest.	 Then,
wheeling	 his	 mount	 in	 the	 shallow	 water,	 he	 kicked	 sharply	 with	 his	 heels	 and	 without	 waiting	 for
Suleiman	Beg	set	off	back	towards	the	Lahore	fort	where	his	father	was	no	doubt	already	beginning	his
meticulous	planning	of	the	grandiose	celebrations	he	would	hold	to	mark	the	capture	of	Kandahar.	How
could	 a	 man	 like	 Akbar,	 who	 from	 youth	 had	 known	 only	 success	 and	 glory,	 possibly	 understand	 the
yawning	emptiness,	the	futility	of	his	own	existence?
It	was	May.	In	just	a	few	days	the	monsoon	would	begin	and	the	heat	was	intense	as	musicians	playing
long	 brass	 pipes	 and	 beating	 drums	 suspended	 on	 thongs	 round	 their	 necks	 led	 the	 procession	 from	 the
haram	quarters	within	the	Lahore	palace	out	into	the	city.	Next	marched	the	eight	bodyguards	assigned	to
guard	Akbar’s	beloved	grandson	Khurram	from	the	day	of	his	birth.	Then,	mounted	on	matching	creamcoloured	ponies,	came	eight-year-old	Khusrau	and	six-year-old	Parvez,	egrets’	feathers	nodding	in	their
tightly	bound	silk	turbans.
Standing	 with	 some	 of	 Akbar’s	 most	 senior	 courtiers	 and	 commanders	 to	 the	 left-hand	 side	 of	 the
carved	sandstone	entrance	to	the	imperial	school,	Salim	thought	how	serious	his	two	elder	sons	looked,
how	 stiffly	 they	 sat	 in	 their	 saddles.	 They	 weren’t	 used	 to	 such	 ceremonials.	 Much	 as	 their	 grandfather
loved	them,	he	had	never	put	on	such	a	show	to	mark	the	start	of	their	formal	education	which,	in	line	with
Moghul	tradition	for	the	rearing	of	royal	princes,	began	at	the	age	of	four	years,	four	months	and	four	days
–	Khurram’s	exact	age	today.	Beyond	Khusrau	and	Parvez,	Salim	could	see	the	baby	elephant	on	which
Khurram	was	riding	and	which	Akbar	himself	was	leading	with	a	golden	chain	attached	to	the	animal’s
jewelled	headplate.	Immediately	behind	came	the	captain	of	Akbar’s	own	bodyguard,	carrying	the	yak’s
tail	standard	that	since	early	times	had	been	a	symbol	of	Moghul	rule.
Khurram	 himself	 was	 in	 an	 open	 howdah	 of	 beaten	 silver	 set	 with	 turquoises	 –	 a	 stone	 that	 Timur
himself	had	loved	to	wear.	A	parasol	of	green	silk	embroidered	with	pearls	and	held	aloft	by	the	attendant
riding	 behind	 him	 in	 the	 howdah	 protected	 him	 from	 the	 hot	 sunlight	 shafting	 down	 from	 a	 completely
clear	blue	sky.	Salim	felt	sweat	running	between	his	shoulder	blades,	though	he	too	was	protected	by	a
silk	canopy.	But	as	the	procession	drew	nearer,	Salim	realised	that	despite	the	heat	his	youngest	son	was
relishing	 the	 occasion.	 Unlike	 his	 elder	 brothers	 he	 didn’t	 seem	 to	 find	 his	 elaborate	 clothes	 –	 a	 gold
brocade	coat	and	green	pantaloons	–	uncomfortable.	Gems	sparkled	round	his	neck	and	on	his	fingers	and
in	the	tiny	ceremonial	dagger	tucked	into	his	sash.	Though	he	looked	like	a	little	bejewelled	doll	he	was
clearly	 enjoying	 himself,	 smiling	 and	 looking	 anything	 but	 nervous,	 waving	 to	 the	 straining,	 cheering
crowds	being	held	back	by	soldiers.
A	large	red	and	blue	Persian	carpet	had	been	spread	out	in	front	of	the	school	steps.	Some	twenty	paces
away	 from	 them,	 the	 musicians	 fell	 silent	 and	 the	 procession	 divided	 to	 one	 side	 or	 the	 other	 leaving
Akbar	and	Khurram	on	his	baby	elephant	alone	in	front	of	the	school.	Akbar	advanced	to	the	very	centre
of	the	carpet,	and	after	a	quick	glance	at	his	grandson	to	assure	himself	that	the	boy	was	seated	securely,
addressed	Salim	and	the	assembled	members	of	his	court.
‘I	 have	 invited	 you	 here	 to	 witness	 an	 important	 event.	 My	 beloved	 grandson	 Prince	 Khurram	 will

today	begin	his	education.	I	have	assembled	the	best	scholars	from	within	my	empire	and	beyond.	They
will	 instruct	 him	 in	 every	 subject	 from	 literature	 and	 mathematics	 to	 astronomy	 and	 the	 history	 of	 his
forebears,	and	will	guide	him	on	the	journey	from	boyhood	to	manhood.’
Yes,	thought	Salim,	and	they	included	Abul	Fazl’s	father	Shaikh	Mubarak,	who	was	to	instruct	Khurram
about	 religion.	 Abul	 Fazl	 himself	 was	 standing	 just	 a	 few	 paces	 away,	 his	 usual	 leather-bound	 ledger
beneath	his	right	arm,	doubtless	ready	to	compose	some	florid	verses	about	the	occasion.	As	if	aware	of
Salim’s	scrutiny,	the	chronicler	returned	his	stare,	then	looked	away	again.	Salim	returned	his	attention	to
his	father.
‘The	prince	has	already	shown	signs	of	exceptional	ability,’	Akbar	was	saying.	‘My	astrologers	predict
that	he	will	achieve	great	things.	Come,	Khurram,	it	is	time.’
He	 released	 the	 catches	 fastening	 the	 side	 of	 the	 howdah	 and	 lifted	 Khurram	 down.	 Then,	 taking	 the
child	by	the	hand,	he	walked	slowly	towards	the	high,	arched	entrance.	As	they	passed	within	a	few	feet
of	 Salim,	 Khurram	 gave	 him	 a	 quick	 smile	 but	 Akbar	 continued	 to	 look	 straight	 ahead.	 Another	 few
moments	and	they	had	vanished	inside.	Salim	tried	to	compose	his	thoughts.	A	father	should	be	able	to	do
things	for	his	sons.	He,	not	Akbar,	should	have	taken	Khurram	to	school	on	his	first	day,	just	as	he	had
taken	Khusrau	and	Parvez.	He	not	Akbar	should	have	chosen	his	son’s	tutors.	But	Akbar	had	robbed	him
of	all	that	.	.	.
The	familiar	heaviness	that	always	came	when	he	thought	about	Khurram	settled	around	his	heart.	He
loved	him	but	he	didn’t	know	him	and	perhaps	never	would.	When	the	ties	between	parent	and	child	were
broken	 so	 early	 perhaps	 they	 could	 never	 be	 mended	 .	 .	 .	 Hamida	 had	 once	 told	 him	 that	 his	 greatgrandfather	Babur	had	been	moved	by	his	love	for	one	wife	to	give	her	the	child	of	another.	Akbar	had
deprived	 him	 and	 Jodh	 Bai	 of	 their	 son	 as	 surely	 as	 Babur	 had	 robbed	 that	 mother	 of	 her	 child.	 For	 a
moment	he	stared	at	the	archway	into	the	school,	tempted	to	enter,	but	what	would	be	the	point?	Akbar,	he
was	pretty	sure,	didn’t	want	him	there.	Khurram	didn’t	need	him.
‘Highness,	your	other	sons	and	the	rest	of	the	procession	are	about	to	return	to	the	palace.	Only	your
father’s	bodyguards	are	remaining	here.	Shall	we	go	back?’	Suleiman	Beg’s	voice	forced	Salim	back	to
the	present.	Like	himself,	his	friend	was	sweating.	The	heat	was	becoming	unbearable.	Salim	nodded.	It
would	be	good	to	return	to	the	cool	and	shade	of	the	palace	and	Jodh	Bai	would	be	eager	to	hear	how
well	Khurram	had	conducted	himself.
‘Your	father	certainly	knows	how	to	put	on	a	spectacle.	The	crowds	were	almost	hysterical,’	Suleiman
Beg	 went	 on	 as,	 with	 Salim’s	 own	 bodyguard	 behind	 them,	 and	 fanned	 by	 attendants	 wielding	 giant
peacock-feather	fans,	they	slowly	retraced	their	steps.
‘He	likes	to	show	the	people	his	wealth	and	splendour.	He	thinks	it	makes	them	proud	to	be	citizens	of
the	Moghul	empire	–	and	proud	to	be	his	subjects.’
‘He’s	right.	Didn’t	you	hear	their	shouts	of	“Allah	Akbar”?	They	love	him.’
‘Yes.’	Salim’s	head	was	beginning	to	ache	and	the	sun’s	glare	–	so	relentlessly	bright	–	was	hurting	his
eyes.	Everyone	loved	Akbar.	He	began	to	walk	more	quickly,	suddenly	desperate	to	be	back	in	his	own
apartments	and	alone	with	his	thoughts.
His	 father	 was	 sensible	 to	 have	 waited	 for	 the	 cool	 weather	 to	 return	 before	 making	 the	 journey	 south
from	 Lahore	 to	 inspect	 the	 newly	 reconstructed	 fort	 at	 Agra,	 Salim	 reflected	 as,	 six	 months	 later,	 the
imperial	party	rode	on	elephant-back	up	the	steep,	twisting	ramp	with	its	right-angled	turns	designed	to
slow	down	and	frustrate	attackers	and	through	the	fort’s	towering	gateway,	the	great	gates	studded	with
spikes	 to	 wound	 any	 elephant	 which	 tried	 to	 batter	 them	 down.	 Akbar	 was	 on	 the	 leading	 elephant,

Khurram	as	usual	by	his	side.
‘Majesty,	you	have	surpassed	yourself,’	said	Abul	Fazl	when	they	descended	from	their	howdahs	a	few
minutes	later,	gazing	up	at	the	seventy-foot-high	sandstone	battlements	snaking	a	mile	and	a	half	around	the
reconstructed	fort.
For	once	Abul	Fazl	wasn’t	exaggerating,	Salim	had	to	admit.	Unlike	Akbar,	he	hadn’t	visited	the	fort
while	 the	 work	 had	 been	 under	 way	 but	 he	 had	 seen	 the	 plans	 drawn	 up	 by	 his	 father’s	 architects	 and
knew	 that	 Akbar	 had	 remodelled	 the	 Agra	 fort	 almost	 completely,	 strengthening	 its	 external	 defences,
beautifying	 its	 interior	 and	 massively	 extending	 it	 to	 make	 it	 more	 imposing	 and	 imperial.	 The	 old
building	constructed	by	the	Lodi	dynasty	and	seized	from	them	by	Babur	had	been	of	brick	as	much	as	of
sandstone.	 Akbar	 had	 used	 only	 sandstone,	 employing	 Hindu	 craftsmen	 to	 carve	 it	 just	 as	 he	 had	 at
Fatehpur	 Sikri.	 New	 courtyards	 and	 gardens	 were	 enclosed	 by	 elegant	 colonnades.	 Over	 one	 hundred
sandstone	columns	supported	the	roof	of	the	new	durbar	hall.
‘Well,	 Salim,	 what	 do	 you	 think?’	 Akbar	 was	 almost	 visibly	 swelling	 with	 pride	 as	 he	 looked	 about
him.
‘It’s	 magnificent,’	 said	 Salim,	 doing	 no	 more	 than	 speak	 his	 thoughts.	 All	 around	 him	 the	 courtiers
Akbar	had	brought	with	him	from	Lahore	on	this	tour	of	inspection	were	also	murmuring	their	admiration.
‘So	it	should	be,	given	the	cost,	but	our	coffers	are	deep.	I	could	build	a	hundred	such	forts.’	Akbar	ran
a	hand	over	a	carved	frieze	of	narcissi	and	irises	so	delicate	and	detailed	they	appeared	to	be	bending	in
the	wind.	‘What	about	you,	Khurram?	Do	you	think	the	builders	have	done	well?’
Khurram’s	 young	 eyes	 didn’t	 look	 that	 impressed.	 ‘They’ve	 just	 done	 what	 you	 told	 them	 to	 do,
Grandfather.’
Akbar	threw	back	his	head	and	laughed.	‘You	are	hard	to	please;	that’s	not	a	bad	thing	in	a	prince.	But	I
think	I	can	impress	even	you.’	Akbar	stripped	off	his	silk	tunic	and	the	fine	muslin	shirt	beneath	it.	Despite
his	age,	he	was	still	magnificently	muscled,	his	torso	lean	and	hard	as	that	of	a	man	half	his	age.	‘You	two,
come	over	here,’	he	shouted	to	two	of	the	youngest	of	his	bodyguards.	They	exchanged	a	startled	look	then
hurried	forward.	‘Put	down	your	weapons	and	strip	off	like	me.’
The	 men	 hurriedly	 did	 as	 they	 were	 told.	 What	 was	 his	 father	 doing?	 wondered	 Salim.	 All	 around,
people	were	staring	at	the	emperor	in	astonishment,	but	Akbar	was	grinning.	‘Now	come	over	here	so	I
can	look	at	you	properly.’	As	the	two	young	men	stood	before	him,	Akbar	ran	his	hands	over	their	arms
and	 shoulders,	 feeling	 their	 muscles.	 ‘Not	 bad,	 but	 I	 wish	 I	 had	 chosen	 bigger	 stronger	 men.’	 Then,
without	warning,	he	punched	the	bigger	of	the	two	guards	in	the	stomach.	The	youth	gasped	and	doubled
over,	 clutching	 himself	 and	 breathing	 in	 great,	 wheezy	 gasps.	 ‘You	 need	 to	 toughen	 up.	 Where	 are	 you
from?’
‘Delhi,	Majesty,’	he	managed	to	gulp	out.
‘If	you	were	of	the	old	Moghul	clans	you	could	have	taken	a	blow	twice	as	hard	without	flinching.	Let
me	show	you	what	I	am	made	of.’	Akbar	lunged	forward,	grabbed	the	youth	round	the	waist	and	shoving
him	under	his	left	arm	lifted	him	from	the	ground.	Then,	satisfied,	he	let	the	guard’s	feet	touch	the	ground
again.	‘You,	come	to	my	other	side,’	he	ordered	the	second	youth,	who	a	moment	later	was	gripped	tight
by	Akbar’s	right	arm.	Bracing	his	legs	apart,	Akbar	took	a	deep	breath	and	lifted	both	young	men	off	the
ground	at	once.
Khurram	let	out	a	delighted	shriek,	but	Akbar	hadn’t	finished.	Lifting	the	men	yet	higher	so	that	his	arm
muscles	 bulged	 and	 the	 veins	 stood	 out	 among	 the	 whitened	 battle	 scars,	 he	 began	 to	 run	 towards	 the
battlements.	 ‘What	 are	 you	 waiting	 for,	 Khurram?’	 he	 shouted	 over	 his	 shoulder.	 ‘Come	 with	 me.’
Khurram	at	once	trotted	after	his	grandfather.	After	a	moment’s	hesitation	Salim	followed,	his	other	sons
and	the	rest	of	the	courtiers	close	behind.	Akbar	had	gone	insane,	he	was	thinking	as	he	saw	his	father

climb	the	flight	of	sandstone	steps	to	the	battlements,	accidentally	banging	the	head	of	one	of	the	men	he
was	clutching,	and	begin	running	along	them.
Watching	that	dogged	figure,	Salim	guessed	what	Akbar	was	intending	to	do	–	run	the	whole	mile	and	a
half.	Sure	enough,	though	running	slowly,	Akbar	didn’t	falter	until	he	had	completed	the	entire	circuit	and
descended	to	the	courtyard	once	more.	His	breathing	was	ragged	and	sweat	was	pouring	off	his	body	as
he	released	the	two	soldiers,	one	of	whom	indeed	had	a	fine	bruise	on	his	forehead,	but	his	expression
was	triumphant.
‘Majesty,	you	still	have	the	strength	of	your	youth,’	said	Abul	Fazl,	who	had	followed	Akbar	round	the
battlements	and	was	not	as	out	of	breath	as	Salim	expected.	He	was	fitter	than	he	looked.
‘Well,	Khurram?	What	do	you	say	now?	Have	I	impressed	you?’
The	child	nodded.	‘You	are	the	strongest	man	I	know,	Grandfather.	Are	you	going	to	teach	me	how	to
hunt	like	you	promised?’
‘Of	course.	And	more	than	that	I	am	going	to	teach	you	how	we	make	war.	When	you	are	just	a	little
older	you	will	attend	the	meetings	of	my	war	council	and	I	will	take	you	on	campaign.	I	have	created	a
great	 empire	 but	 all	 that	 will	 be	 for	 nothing	 if	 my	 descendants	 cannot	 make	 it	 greater	 still.	 Such	 an
education	cannot	begin	too	early.’

Chapter	23

Pomegranate	Blossom

usk	had	fallen	on	the	eighth	day	of	the	Nauruz,	the	New	Year	festival	which	celebrated	the	sun’s	entry
into	Aries.	In	a	few	minutes	the	feasting	would	begin	again	in	the	palace	courtyard,	where	servants
were	lighting	candles	and	arranging	cushions	around	low	tables.	Salim,	already	dressed	for	the	evening’s
entertainment,	 eyed	 the	 scene	 without	 enthusiasm.	 The	 Nauruz	 was	 a	 Persian	 custom	 that	 Akbar	 had
introduced	into	Hindustan.	Apart	from	the	emperor’s	birthday,	it	was	the	most	lavish	of	all	spectacles	at	a
court	 where	 shows	 of	 opulence	 and	 extravagance	 were	 the	 rule,	 and	 his	 father	 attended	 to	 every	 detail
himself.
Each	 day	 so	 far	 had	 brought	 camel	 races	 and	 elephant	 fights,	 singing	 and	 dancing,	 fireworks	 and
acrobatics	and	the	heaping	of	money	and	fresh	honours	on	Akbar’s	loyal	commanders	and	courtiers.	Each
night	 the	 emperor	 had	 been	 the	 guest	 of	 a	 different	 noble,	 but	 tonight	 was	 his	 own	 feast	 for	 his	 special
favourites	which	must,	of	course,	surpass	all	others.	Guests	would	drink	from	jade	cups	inlaid	with	rubies
and	emeralds.	Standing	in	the	shadow	of	a	sandstone	column,	Salim	watched	the	fortunate	few	beginning
to	arrive,	eyes	lingering	on	the	gleaming	cups,	doubtless	calculating	whether	they	would	be	allowed	to
keep	them	at	the	end	of	the	evening’s	revelry.	In	the	centre	of	the	courtyard,	on	a	dais	draped	with	cloth	of
gold,	stood	the	green	velvet,	pearl-embroidered	canopy	supported	on	silver	poles	beneath	which	Akbar
himself	would	sit	on	a	low	throne.
The	Nauruz	was	not	a	time	of	rest	for	the	cooks.	They	had	been	busy	since	dawn.	The	rich,	savoury
aroma	of	roasting	fowl	and	of	whole	sheep	basted	with	a	mixture	of	saffron,	cloves,	cumin	seed	and	ghee
as	they	turned	on	the	spit	was	already	filling	the	air.	It	wasn’t	long	before	three	trumpet	blasts	announced
the	arrival	of	the	emperor.	Salim	scrutinised	the	magnificent	gold-clad	figure	moving	through	the	ranks	of
courtiers	as	they	bowed	low	before	him,	like	a	field	of	bright	Kashmiri	flowers	bending	to	the	wind.	Not
even	 Timur	 himself	 could	 have	 presented	 such	 an	 image.	 Tonight	 Akbar,	 the	 absolute	 ruler	 of	 all	 he
surveyed,	 would	 sit	 alone	 in	 his	 magnificence	 on	 his	 dais.	 A	 table	 below	 and	 to	 the	 right	 had	 been
prepared	for	Salim	and	his	half-brother	Daniyal.	Abul	Fazl	and	Abdul	Rahman	would	sit	at	an	identical
table	positioned	symmetrically	to	the	left.
Seeing	that	his	father	was	now	seated,	Salim	moved	through	the	guests	to	take	his	place	beside	Daniyal.
Akbar	acknowledged	him	with	a	brief	nod	then	returned	his	attention	to	a	dish	that	his	food	taster	had	just
presented	to	him.	As	always,	his	father	ate	sparingly.	Salim	had	often	heard	him	criticise	commanders	for
getting	 soft	 and	 fat.	 ‘With	 a	 belly	 like	 that	 you	 could	 never	 have	 ridden	 with	 my	 grandfather	 on	 his
conquest	 of	 Hindustan,	 though	 the	 clan	 chiefs	 might	 have	 employed	 you	 as	 a	 jester,’	 he	 had	 recently
rebuked	a	corpulent	Tajik	officer	at	least	fifteen	years	his	junior	as	he	patted	him	on	his	round	stomach.
Akbar	had	been	smiling,	but	Salim	knew	him	well	enough	to	know	it	wasn’t	a	joke	and	sure	enough	the
officer	had	soon	been	ordered	to	a	remote	outpost	in	Bengal	where	he	would	sweat	off	his	fat	among	the
swamps	and	mosquitoes.
Sometimes	 Salim	 watched	 Akbar	 as	 he	 exercised.	 Thrusting	 and	 parrying	 with	 a	 sword,	 bending	 his
favourite	bow	of	white	poplar	to	shoot	down	a	pigeon,	or	wrestling,	he	could	still	beat	men	half	his	age.

D

Salim	glanced	at	Daniyal,	whose	flushed	and	sweating	face	revealed	he	had	not	come	to	the	feast	entirely
sober.	His	dilated	pupils	and	foolish	half-grin	as	he	looked	about	him	suggested	he	had	also	taken	opium.
Daniyal	was	weak,	Salim	thought.	But	as	he	saw	his	brother’s	shaking	hands	trying	and	failing	to	hold	his
drinking	cup	steady	he	felt	some	pity.	He	could	understand	the	temptation.	Sometimes	in	his	frustration	he
too	drank	to	excess	or	found	consolation	in	bhang	–	cannabis	–	or	a	few	pellets	of	opium	dissolved	in
rosewater.	But	those	times	were	rare.	He	wanted	to	keep	himself	sharp	in	mind	and	body	just	in	case	his
father	should	give	him	a	military	command	or	some	other	responsibility	he	craved.
Daniyal,	though,	seemed	to	have	abandoned	thoughts	of	anything	but	pleasure,	while	if	the	rumours	from
Malwa	and	Gujarat	were	true	Murad	was	growing	ever	fonder	of	drinking	and	squandering	his	chance	to
impress	his	father	in	the	post	that	Salim	had	so	desired.	Surely	he	had	deserved	the	opportunity	more,	he
thought.	 Why	 had	 his	 father	 and	 Abul	 Fazl	 deprived	 him	 of	 it?	 He	 was	 more	 of	 a	 man	 than	 his	 halfbrothers	and	as	much	of	a	man	as	his	father,	despite	all	the	latter’s	exercising.	All	he	wanted	was	to	prove
himself	so.
Salim’s	resentful	eyes	returned	again	and	again	to	the	glittering	figure	of	Akbar	as	the	feast	progressed.
Musicians	from	Gwalior,	famed	for	their	skill,	were	coaxing	soft,	haunting	sounds	from	their	flutes	and
their	 stringed	 instruments,	 the	 big-bellied	 tanpura	 and	 the	 two-bowl	 rudra-vina.	 Every	 few	 minutes	 a
qorchi	ushered	forward	a	courtier	wishing	to	present	a	Nauruz	gift	to	the	emperor.	The	attendants	were
bringing	yet	more	food	–	almonds	and	pistachios	wrapped	in	gold	and	silver	leaf,	pale	green	grapes	and
wedges	of	orange-fleshed	musk	melon	resting	on	crushed	ice	from	the	fort’s	ice	house	where	giant	chunks
carried	by	mules	down	the	passes	from	the	distant	northern	mountains	were	stored	–	and	ewers	of	cool,
scented	sherbets.	Salim	looked	up	into	the	soft	night	sky	and	at	the	sliver	of	moon	whose	silvery	light	was
far	outshone	by	the	mass	of	candles	arranged	around	the	courtyard.	Sometimes	these	feasts	could	go	on
until	dawn.	He	wondered	how	soon	he	would	be	able	to	slip	away.
The	musicians	were	putting	down	their	instruments	and	bowing	low	before	Akbar.	It	must	be	time	for
some	other	entertainment,	thought	Salim	–	fire-eaters	or	rope-climbers	or	perhaps	a	fight	between	wild
beasts	released	into	the	same	cage.
Akbar	 rose,	 and	 instantly	 a	 hush	 fell	 across	 the	 courtyard.	 ‘Tonight	 is	 the	 high	 point	 of	 our	 Nauruz
celebrations.	Though	we	have	already	exchanged	many	gifts	of	jewels,	I	have	one	priceless	gem	I	 wish
for	a	short	while	to	share	with	you.	Two	months	ago,	the	Turkish	sultan	sent	me	a	dancing	girl	of	rare	skill
and	beauty	from	Italy,	a	land	far	from	our	own.	I	have	called	her	Anarkali,	“Pomegranate	Blossom”.’	He
turned	to	the	attendant	at	his	side.	‘Summon	Anarkali.’
Even	 when	 Akbar	 had	 sat	 down,	 the	 silence	 continued	 as	 the	 guests	 waited,	 eyes	 bright	 with
anticipation.	Salim’s	own	curiosity	was	whetted	and	he	decided	to	remain	for	a	while	longer.	He	had	only
seen	portraits	of	European	women	before,	presented	to	his	father	by	travellers.	He	had	of	course	heard	of
Italy	 from	 the	 Jesuits,	 some	 of	 whom	 had	 been	 born	 there,	 but	 had	 learned	 little	 of	 its	 luxuries	 –	 or	 its
women	–	from	their	ascetic	sectarian	discourses.
Glancing	at	his	father,	Salim	saw	a	well-pleased,	even	self-satisfied	smile	curve	his	lips	as	he	listened
to	 the	 excited	 buzz	 of	 anticipation	 from	 his	 courtiers	 while	 attendants	 spread	 yet	 more	 carpets	 over	 the
fine	 kilims	 already	 covering	 the	 courtyard.	 As	 soon	 as	 they	 were	 finished,	 other	 servants	 carrying	 gilt
incense	burners	suspended	from	chains	on	their	wrists	began	running	round	and	round	the	courtyard,	pale
fragrant	smoke	trailing	behind	them	until	they	had	created	such	a	cloud	that	Salim	could	barely	make	out
his	father	on	his	dais.	Suddenly,	at	a	signal	from	Akbar,	further	attendants	darted	forward	and	extinguished
all	the	candles.	No	one	spoke	in	the	soft	scented	darkness.	Then,	just	as	abruptly,	the	candelabras	were
again	ablaze	and	there	in	the	centre	of	the	courtyard,	amid	the	remaining	wisps	of	smoke,	stood	Anarkali,
wreathed	in	a	long	veil	of	semi-transparent	gauze	which	emphasised	rather	than	concealed	the	outline	of

her	full	breasts	and	opulent	hips.	Her	head	beneath	the	circlet	of	pearls	securing	the	veil	was	erect.
She	raised	her	arms	and	began	to	sway.	No	music	accompanied	the	sinuous	motion	of	her	body,	only	the
clash	of	her	heavy	bracelets	and	anklets.	Her	movements	became	freer	and	wilder.	She	began	tossing	her
head	from	side	to	side	and	then	started	to	spin,	breasts	swaying	and	bare	feet	stamping	on	the	dark	red
carpet	as	she	turned.	Salim	watched	mesmerised,	like	all	the	guests.	First	one	man,	then	another,	began
beating	on	the	table	before	him	with	his	fist.	The	noise	grew	thunderous	as	Anarkali	whirled	yet	faster,
arms	outspread.	Then	with	a	cry	she	ripped	the	veil	from	her	body.
There	was	a	collective	gasp.	It	was	not	just	the	perfection	of	her	voluptuous	body,	naked	except	for	her
tight	jewelled	bodice	and	almost	sheer	muslin	pantaloons.	It	was	her	hair.	The	colour	of	palest	gold	and
falling	 to	 her	 waist,	 it	 flew	 out	 in	 a	 shimmering	 mass	 around	 her	 as	 she	 continued	 to	 whirl.	 Suddenly,
dramatically,	 she	 stopped.	 She	 was	 smiling,	 fully	 aware	 of	 the	 sensation	 she	 had	 caused.	 Then,
approaching	the	dais,	she	dropped	slowly	to	her	knees	before	Akbar	and	with	two	flicks	of	her	head	sent
her	 glorious	 hair	 flying	 first	 forward	 over	 her	 breasts	 and	 then	 back.	 Arms	 outstretched	 towards	 the
emperor,	 she	 leaned	 further	 and	 further	 backwards,	 arching	 her	 supple	 spine	 until	 her	 head	 touched	 the
ground	behind	her.
In	the	flickering	candlelight	Salim	was	close	enough	to	make	out	Anarkali’s	features.	Her	face	was	oval
with	 a	 cleft	 chin	 and	 a	 small	 straight	 nose,	 and	 above	 them	 the	 most	 beautiful	 eyes	 he	 had	 ever	 seen	 –
somewhere	between	dark	blue	and	violet.	He	also	saw	his	father’s	fond	complacent	gaze	as	it	rested	on
his	prized	possession.	Salim’s	own	pulses	were	pounding	and	his	mouth	was	dry.	He	must	have	Anarkali,
he	would	have	her	.	.	.
‘Highness,	the	risk	.	.	.	Anarkali	is	at	present	your	father’s	favourite	concubine.	Discovery	would	mean
death	 beneath	 the	 elephant’s	 foot	 or	 worse	 for	 me	 and	 for	 her.	 In	 the	 seven	 years	 I	 have	 been
superintendent	 of	 your	 father’s	 haram	 no	 one	 has	 ever	 asked	 such	 a	 thing	 of	 me.’	 The	 khawajasara,	 a
small,	beak-nosed	woman,	looked	terrified.	Salim	could	see	a	vein	beating	in	her	right	temple	beneath	her
thinning	grey	hair,	but	he	could	also	see	how	tempted	she	was.
‘Name	 your	 price.	 I’ll	 give	 you	 whatever	 you	 ask.’	 Salim	 reached	 inside	 his	 tunic	 for	 a	 silk	 pouch
hanging	round	his	neck	from	a	hide	thong.	Loosening	it,	he	drew	out	a	ruby.	As	he	held	it	up	to	the	light	of
an	oil	lamp	burning	in	a	niche	in	the	small	court	behind	the	elephants’	stables	to	which	he	had	summoned
the	khawajasara,	the	uncut	gem	glowed.	‘This	is	the	pick	of	my	jewels	–	a	ruby	of	the	first	water	worth
one	 thousand	 gold	 mohurs.	 Do	 what	 I	 ask	 and	 it	 is	 yours.	 You	 and	 your	 family	 will	 be	 wealthy	 for
generations.’
‘But	how	can	I,	Highness?’	The	khawajasara	stared	at	the	gem	as	if	unable	to	tear	her	eyes	away.	‘Only
the	emperor	can	enter	the	imperial	haram.’
‘You	are	the	superintendent	and	go	to	and	from	the	haram	all	the	time.	You	could	smuggle	Anarkali	out
disguised	as	your	attendant.	The	guards	will	not	suspect	or	challenge	you.’
‘Highness,	I’m	not	sure	.	.’	the	khawajasara	said	miserably.	‘The	emperor	sends	for	her	all	the	time	.	.
.’
‘Three	days	from	now	my	father	departs	on	a	long	hunting	expedition.	Bring	her	to	me	the	first	night	he
is	away	and	the	ruby	is	yours.’	As	Salim	waited,	he	turned	the	gem	so	that	its	heart	flashed	like	fire.	The
khawajasara	bit	her	lip	but	then	seemed	to	make	up	her	mind.
‘Very	well,	I	will	do	as	you	ask.’	Pulling	her	dark	shawl	over	her	head	as	she	spoke,	she	immediately
turned	 and	 hurried	 away,	 merging	 into	 the	 purple	 shadows,	 her	 bare	 feet	 padding	 away	 over	 the	 stone
paving	still	warm	from	the	day’s	heat.

The	time	before	Akbar’s	departure	passed	slowly.	Salim	could	think	of	little	but	Anarkali	–	those	violet
eyes,	that	golden	hair.	She	was	like	a	jewel	herself	but	one	made	of	soft,	living	flesh,	not	hard	stone.	He
half	 expected	 his	 father	 to	 change	 his	 plans	 but	 at	 dawn	 on	 the	 third	 morning	 he	 watched	 Akbar,
accompanied	 by	 Abul	 Fazl	 and	 a	 few	 of	 his	 inner	 circle,	 ride	 through	 the	 palace	 gates	 to	 the	 deep
booming	 of	 the	 gatehouse	 drums.	 He	 was	 planning	 to	 be	 away	 for	 three	 weeks	 and	 fifty	 bullock	 carts
loaded	with	tents,	cooking	pots,	chests	of	clothes,	bows,	arrows	and	muskets	followed	the	procession	of
guards,	 huntsmen	 and	 beaters,	 raising	 a	 cloud	 of	 white	 dust	 that	 spiralled	 into	 the	 air	 long	 after	 the
procession	had	wound	out	of	the	city	and	into	the	plains.
That	night	Salim	waited	in	his	apartments.	The	candles	his	attendants	always	lit	at	sunset	–	fetching	the
flame	from	the	palace	fire-pot,	the	agingir	 –	 were	 half	 melted	 and	 the	 palace	 had	 fallen	 still	 and	 quiet
around	him	when,	an	hour	after	midnight,	he	at	last	heard	a	gentle	knocking	on	the	door.
‘Highness.’	It	was	one	of	his	guards,	face	creased	with	the	sleep	from	which	he	had	just	been	roused.
‘Two	women	are	here.’	Salim	had	told	his	men	that	he	had	summoned	a	girl	from	the	bazaar.	It	was	not	the
first	time	he	had	done	so	and	they	had	not	looked	surprised.
‘Send	them	in.’
Moments	later,	two	heavily	veiled	women	stood	before	him.	The	khawajasara	at	once	uncovered	her
face	and	Salim	saw	sweat	beading	it.	‘All	went	as	it	should,	Highness.	No	one	questioned	me.’
‘You’ve	done	well.	Now	leave	us	and	return	an	hour	before	dawn.’
‘My	reward,	Highness	.	.	.’
Eyes	fixed	on	the	motionless	figure	of	Anarkali,	Salim	pulled	the	pouch	containing	the	ruby	from	his
neck.	‘Take	it.’
He	scarcely	noticed	as	the	khawajasara	hastened	from	the	room.	Anarkali	was	wearing	a	plain	black
robe	that	was	slightly	too	long	for	her	so	that	the	hem	was	coated	with	dust.	The	khawajasara	had	done
well.	 Who	 would	 have	 guessed	 that	 such	 drab	 garments	 concealed	 his	 father’s	 favourite	 concubine,	 the
cherished	companion	of	his	most	intimate	moments?
‘You	sent	for	me,	Highness?’	Anarkali	spoke	in	Persian	that	was	oddly	cadenced,	but	her	voice	was
low	and	soft.
‘Let	me	see	your	hair.’
Anarkali	slowly	pulled	off	her	veil	and	let	it	float	to	the	floor.	Her	golden	hair	was	concealed	beneath
a	tight-fitting	black	cap.	Her	eyes,	the	colour	of	amethysts	in	the	faint	candlelight	and	fringed	by	lashes
darkened	with	kohl,	looked	straight	into	his	with	frank	curiosity	as	she	raised	her	arms	to	take	off	the	cap
and	her	hair,	pale	gold	like	corn	in	the	moonlight,	tumbled	around	her.	Her	smile	told	Salim,	just	as	it	had
when	 she	 had	 been	 dancing,	 that	 she	 understood	 her	 power	 over	 men.	 Her	 confidence	 was	 deeply
arousing.
‘Since	I	saw	you	dance	I’ve	thought	of	nothing	but	you.	I	desire	you.’
‘If	your	father	finds	out	he	will	be	very	angry	with	me.’
‘I	will	tell	him	you	were	blameless	–	that	it	was	all	my	doing.	But	you	don’t	have	to	stay	if	you	don’t
want	to	.	.	.’
‘Your	ardour	flatters	me.	What	woman	in	my	situation	would	refuse	a	prince?’
Without	waiting	for	Salim	to	say	anything	else	Anarkali	quickly	undid	the	fastenings	at	the	shoulder	and
waist	of	her	ugly	robe,	and	wriggled	from	it	like	a	beautiful	snake	sloughing	off	its	skin.	Her	flesh	had	a
soft	 pearl-like	 sheen	 and	 her	 full,	 blue-veined	 breasts,	 tipped	 with	 pink,	 swayed	 a	 little	 as	 she	 came
towards	him.	She	took	his	hands	and	placed	them	on	her	silky,	slender	waist.	Then,	pressing	herself	yet
closer	so	he	could	feel	the	hard	tips	of	her	nipples	through	his	silk	tunic,	she	ran	his	hands	down	over	the

rich	 swell	 of	 her	 hips	 and	 buttocks.	 Her	 skin	 felt	 just	 as	 he	 had	 imagined,	 warm	 and	 yielding.	 An
uncontrollable	shudder	of	virility	ran	through	him	and	stepping	back	from	her	he	began	pulling	off	his	own
clothes,	tearing	the	delicate	fabric	of	his	tunic	in	his	haste.
‘You	have	a	warrior’s	body	like	your	father,	and	are	as	quickly	aroused	.	.	.’
Salim	barely	heard	her.	He	could	think	of	nothing	except	burying	himself	in	that	glorious	body.	Taking
Anarkali’s	hand	he	pulled	her	down	on	to	a	divan,	kicking	brocade	cushions	out	of	the	way.	Winding	his
hands	in	her	long	shining	mass	of	hair,	he	kissed	her	mouth,	then	the	velvet	hollow	between	her	breasts.
He	 could	 scarcely	 believe	 the	 perfection	 of	 her	 from	 her	 delicate	 collarbones	 to	 the	 lush	 flesh	 of	 her
rounded	thighs.	Sensing	his	urgency,	she	was	already	spreading	her	legs	and	arching	her	back.	Her	body
beneath	his	felt	slippery	with	sweat.	‘Highness,’	she	was	whispering,	‘now	.	.	.	I	am	ready	.	.	.’	As	Salim
entered	 her	 and	 began	 to	 thrust,	 triumph	 and	 exultation	 surged	 through	 him	 –	 but	 it	 was	 not	 only	 the
pleasure	of	taking	a	beautiful	woman.	It	was	taking	a	woman	who	belonged	to	his	father.
Salim	couldn’t	sleep.	The	night	seemed	intolerably	close	and	hot	and	the	punkah	swinging	slowly	back
and	 forth	 over	 his	 bed	 barely	 disturbed	 the	 heavy	 air.	 Yet	 he	 knew	 what	 was	 really	 keeping	 him	 from
sleep	was	his	longing	for	Anarkali.	The	khawajasara	had	brought	the	Venetian	to	him	on	two	subsequent
nights	before	his	father’s	return	to	Lahore	but	since	then	he	had	not	seen	her.
Why	did	she	fascinate	him	so	much?	It	was	a	hard	question	to	answer,	but	he	knew	it	was	more	than	her
beauty,	 more	 than	 the	 fact	 that	 she	 was	 his	 father’s	 concubine,	 though	 both	 added	 spice.	 There	 was	 a
spirit,	 a	 self-reliance	 about	 her,	 perhaps	 the	 result	 of	 her	 strange,	 turbulent	 life.	 She	 had	 told	 him	 how,
when	she	was	a	young	girl,	pirates	had	attacked	the	ship	on	which	she	was	sailing	off	the	coast	of	north
Africa	with	her	merchant	father,	whose	throat	they	had	slit.	They	had	taken	her	captive	and	she	had	been
sold	in	the	slave	markets	of	Istanbul	to	a	Turkish	brothel	owner	who	had	had	her	instructed	in	the	arts	of
love-making.	Carefully	preserving	her	virginity,	he	had	sold	her	at	the	age	of	fifteen	for	a	great	price	to	a
nobleman	who	had	presented	her	to	the	Sultan.	That	had	been	four	years	ago.
When	 Salim	 asked	 whether	 she	 still	 thought	 of	 her	 homeland,	 Anarkali	 had	 shrugged.	 ‘It	 seems	 long
ago.	 I	 cry	 when	 I	 think	 of	 my	 poor	 father’s	 fate	 but	 had	 we	 stayed	 in	 Venice	 who	 knows	 what	 my	 life
would	 have	 been	 –	 probably	 a	 loveless	 marriage	 to	 some	 rich	 old	 man	 of	 my	 father’s	 choosing.	 He
already	 had	 such	 a	 plan.	 Now	 I	 live	 in	 luxury.	 I	 have	 jewels	 that	 would	 amaze	 the	 wealthiest	 Venetian
noblewomen.’	For	a	moment	a	shadow	had	crossed	her	face,	but	then	she	had	smiled	at	him.	‘And	tonight
a	young	prince	strong	as	a	stallion	shares	my	bed	–	how	could	I	be	sad?’
Such	smoothly	flattering	words	came	easily	to	Anarkali,	thought	Salim	as	sleep	continued	to	elude	him.
All	during	their	love-making	she	had	praised	his	vigour	and	the	pleasure	he	gave	her,	told	him	he	was	the
greatest	lover	she	had	ever	had.	That	everything	she	said	must	be	artificial,	that	she	probably	had	no	real
feelings	for	him	at	all,	didn’t	dim	his	passion	for	her.	That	was	how	she	had	been	trained	and	how	she	had
survived.	But	perhaps	at	this	very	moment	she	was	whispering	the	same	words	to	Akbar	.	.	.
Salim	sat	up.	He	had	come	to	a	decision.	He	would	have	Anarkali	again.	There	must	be	a	way	and	he
would	find	it.
‘There	is	an	old	sandstone	pavilion	hidden	away	in	thick	undergrowth	on	the	bank	of	the	Ravi	river.	It’s
only	 half	 a	 mile	 from	 here.	 I	 sometimes	 rest	 in	 its	 shade	 while	 out	 snipe	 hunting.	 Look	 .	 .	 .’	 Salim
scratched	a	map	with	charcoal	on	a	piece	of	paper.	‘Bring	Anarkali	to	me	there	tonight	while	my	father	is
with	the	members	of	the	ulama.	He	will	hardly	call	for	her	to	dance	before	his	mullahs.’

‘Your	meeting	must	be	brief.	Anarkali	cannot	be	long	gone	from	the	haram	while	the	emperor	is	here.
And,	Highness	.	.	.	this	must	be	the	last	time.	I	cannot	keep	taking	such	risks	.	.	.	the	danger	is	too	great	for
us	all.’	The	khawajasara’s	sharp	nose	was	almost	twitching	with	anxiety.
Salim	nodded,	though	in	his	heart	he	had	no	intention	of	allowing	it	to	be	the	last	time.	He	would	find
other	ways	to	outwit	Akbar.	‘Take	this.	And	mind	you	do	not	fail	me.’	He	pressed	a	bag	of	gold	coins	into
her	hand.	‘I	will	be	waiting	for	you.’
That	night,	as	velvet	shadows	stole	along	the	riverbank,	Salim	pushed	his	way	through	the	dry	rustling
reeds	towards	the	pavilion.	It	must	have	been	beautiful	once.	Slender	columns	and	a	shattered	dome	lay
on	the	dry	earth	and,	as	he	lit	an	oil	lamp,	the	carving	on	a	tumbled	block	of	stone	seemed	to	come	to	life.
It	was	of	a	Hindu	goddess	or	dancing	girl,	naked	except	for	her	jewels,	voluptuous	limbs	moving	in	some
joyful	dance.	It	made	him	think	of	Anarkali’s	sleek,	full	body	and	the	many	positions	it	could	assume,	and
his	pulses	quickened.
He	sat	down	with	his	back	against	a	piece	of	masonry	and	waited,	listening	to	the	rippling	of	the	Ravi.
Some	small	creature	–	a	mouse	perhaps	–	skittered	over	his	boot-clad	feet	and	he	slapped	at	a	mosquito
as	he	felt	its	sharp	bite	on	the	side	of	his	neck.	Glancing	up	he	saw	the	moon	had	risen.	It	was	nearly	full,
casting	a	warm,	apricot	glow	over	the	night	sky,	and	it	meant	that	time	was	passing.	He	strained	his	ears,
hoping	to	hear	a	soft	footfall	along	the	riverbank,	but	there	was	nothing.	Perhaps	something	had	happened,
or	 the	 khawajasara’s	 courage	 had	 finally	 deserted	 her,	 but	 he	 wouldn’t	 give	 up	 yet,	 Salim	 thought.	 He
continued	to	sit	there,	enjoying	the	beauty	of	the	night	and	anticipating	the	moment	when	he	would	again
bury	his	face	beween	those	soft	breasts.	Even	if	the	khawajasara	 had	 changed	 her	 mind	 about	 bringing
Anarkali	to	him	tonight	he	knew	he	could	talk	her	round	.	.	.
Then	beyond	the	thick	reed	beds	he	made	out	a	flickering	light	–	a	torch	perhaps	–	and	smiled.	It	was	a
little	reckless	of	the	khawajasara	–	surely	there	was	enough	moonlight	to	guide	her	steps	–	but	she	had
never	been	to	the	pavilion	before	and	was	perhaps	afraid	of	getting	lost.	Salim	rose	and	peered	harder	in
the	direction	of	the	light.	He	would	go	to	find	them.	But	as	he	picked	his	way	out	of	the	ruins	and	began
pushing	through	the	surrounding	undergrowth	he	suddenly	saw	the	light	of	several	torches	moving	towards
him.	Almost	simultaneously	he	caught	the	sound	of	male	voices	and	of	swift-moving	feet	crashing	through
the	dry	reeds.
What	was	happening?	Had	he	been	betrayed	.	.	.?	Feeling	for	the	dagger	in	his	sash,	Salim	turned,	ready
to	sprint	off	into	the	darkness,	but	found	a	familiar	figure	blocking	his	way.
‘Highness,	your	father	requests	that	you	return	at	once	to	the	palace.’	Abul	Fazl’s	small	eyes	glittered
like	jet	in	the	light	of	the	torch	held	by	one	of	the	guards	who	had	just	arrived	behind	him.
Shocked,	 Salim	 stood	 motionless.	 For	 once	 Abul	 Fazl	 wasn’t	 bothering	 to	 disguise	 his	 feelings	 and
Salim	had	never	seen	him	so	joyously	triumphant.	He	struggled	to	find	words	to	express	his	hatred	and
contempt	for	this	man	but	it	was	Abul	Fazl	who	spoke	again.
‘Highness,	do	you	remember	something	you	once	said	to	me?	I	believe	it	was	“I	see	you	for	what	you
are,	and	the	day	when	my	father	sees	it	as	well	will	be	a	good	one.”	Now	it	seems	it	will	be	the	other	way
round.	Your	father	is	about	to	see	you	for	what	you	are	.	.	.’
‘Summon	the	whore.’	High	on	his	throne,	dressed	in	robes	of	such	deep	purple	they	were	almost	black,
Akbar’s	face	as	he	looked	down	on	his	assembled	courtiers	was	mask-like.	Not	by	the	flicker	of	a	muscle
did	he	acknowledge	the	presence	of	Salim,	standing	bare-headed	below	the	dais	and	still	dressed	in	the
clothes	in	which	he	had	gone	to	his	rendezvous	with	Anarkali.
‘Father,	let	me	speak	.	.	.’

‘How	dare	you	address	me	as	Father	when	your	actions	show	nothing	but	contempt	for	our	relationship.
Be	silent	or	I	will	have	you	silenced.’	Akbar’s	voice	was	full	of	pent-up	fury.
A	few	minutes	later,	through	the	double	doors	of	the	audience	chamber,	Anarkali	appeared,	pushed	into
the	room	by	two	bulky	female	haram	guards.	Her	hands	were	bound	and	her	yellow	hair	streamed	over
her	 shoulders.	 Her	 face	 was	 white	 except	 where	 kohl	 had	 mingled	 with	 her	 tears	 to	 leave	 dark	 tracks.
Salim	 could	 see	 how	 violently	 she	 was	 trembling	 as	 she	 advanced	 slowly	 towards	 Akbar	 and	 threw
herself	on	her	knees	before	him.
‘You	were	my	concubine,	my	favourite.	I	gave	you	everything	you	could	desire	yet	you	betrayed	me	as
your	emperor	and	as	a	man	by	giving	yourself	to	this	wretch	who	calls	himself	my	son.	There	is	only	one
penalty	–	death.’
Anarkali’s	 face	 contorted	 with	 fear	 and	 horror.	 A	 convulsive	 shudder	 ran	 through	 her	 as	 she	 tried	 to
scramble	to	her	feet.	One	of	the	female	gaurds	pushed	her	down	again,	jabbing	her	viciously	in	the	small
of	the	back	with	the	end	of	her	long	wooden	staff.
‘Please,	Majesty	.	.	.’
‘My	ears	are	deaf	to	your	pleas.	I	have	decided	your	punishment.	You	will	be	placed	in	a	small	cell	in
the	palace	dungeons,	which	will	then	be	bricked	up.	As	minutes	turn	to	hours,	hours	to	days,	and	death
draws	near,	you	will	have	time	to	contemplate	your	crime.’
‘No!	 It	 was	 my	 fault,	 not	 hers.	 I	 desired	 her	 and	 bribed	 the	 khawajasara	 to	 bring	 her	 to	 me,’	 Salim
burst	out.
‘I	know,’	said	Akbar,	at	last	turning	his	gaze	on	Salim.	‘How	do	you	think	I	learned	of	your	despicable
acts?	The	khawajasara	herself	came	to	Abul	Fazl	earlier	tonight	and	confessed	everything.	I	have	been
merciful	to	her	.	.	.	she	died	quickly.	But	this	woman	whom	you	are	trying	to	defend	has	broken	every	rule
of	the	imperial	haram.	She	is	lucky	I	do	not	have	her	flayed	alive	and	her	skin	nailed	to	the	palace	gates.’
Akbar	motioned	to	the	captain	of	the	guard.	‘Take	her	away.’
Two	guards	seized	Anarkali,	who	began	screaming	and	clutching	at	the	carpet	with	her	bound	hands	as
if	 hoping	 that	 somehow	 she	 could	 cling	 on	 to	 it	 and	 delay	 the	 dreadful	 punishment	 Akbar	 had	 decreed.
Salim	 looked	 away,	 unable	 to	 bear	 the	 sight	 of	 the	 beauty	 that	 had	 so	 tempted	 him	 and	 now	 as	 a
consequence	was	to	be	destroyed.	The	knowledge	that	there	was	nothing	he	could	do	or	say	to	save	her
overwhelmed	him.	Only	when	Anarkali’s	screams	had	finally	receded	and	the	doors	had	closed	behind
her	did	Salim	again	look	up	at	his	father.	How	cold	he	seemed,	sitting	there	all-powerful	on	his	glittering
throne.	 What	 fate	 was	 he	 about	 to	 pronounce	 on	 his	 eldest	 son?	 Would	 his	 father	 take	 his	 life?	 For	 a
moment	Salim	could	almost	feel	the	bite	of	cold	steel	on	the	back	of	his	neck.	He	had	always	thought	of
his	father,	despite	his	faults,	as	honourable	and	just,	but	his	terrible	revenge	on	Anarkali	had	shaken	that
belief.	Wronged	as	a	man,	he	had	lashed	out	as	a	man.
‘Salim,	 as	 you	 yourself	 have	 admitted,	 you	 are	 the	 guiltiest	 of	 all.’	 After	 a	 pause,	 Akbar	 continued,
‘How	can	I	ever	again	trust	a	son	who	betrays	me	in	such	a	way?	Your	life	is	worthless	to	me	and	to	the
Moghul	empire.’
Salim	 felt	 as	 if	 his	 throat	 was	 constricting	 but	 if	 he	 was	 to	 die	 he	 must	 not	 show	 fear,	 so	 he	 tried	 to
match	his	father	stare	for	stare.
‘You	 are	 still	 young	 and,	 unlike	 you,	 I	 place	 some	 value	 on	 our	 shared	 blood.	 My	 own	 mother	 has
pleaded	for	you	so	I	will	be	merciful.	Tomorrow,	you	will	set	out	for	Kabul	on	an	imperial	inspection	and
there	you	will	stay	until	I	am	ready	to	recall	you.	Your	wives,	your	children	and	the	rest	of	your	household
will	remain	here.	Now	go	from	my	presence	before	I	regret	my	mercy.’
‘You’re	jealous	of	me	because	I	am	young	and	you	are	getting	old.	You	cannot	admit	that	you	are	mortal
and	fear	that	one	day	I	will	take	your	place	on	your	throne	as	well	as	with	your	women,’	Salim	wanted	to

shout,	but	what	was	the	point?	Turning	on	his	heel,	he	walked	slowly	away	down	the	carpet	that	was	still
marked	by	the	tracks	of	Anarkali’s	dragging	feet.	Was	this	the	end	of	all	his	ambitions	–	if	not	of	his	life?

Chapter	24

The	Indus

riving	rain	lashed	the	roof	of	Salim’s	large	tent	as	he	tossed	and	turned	beneath	his	fine	cotton	sheets
and	embroidered	woollen	Kashmiri	blankets.	His	sleep	was	troubled	as	it	had	so	often	been	since
leaving	Lahore	some	weeks	earlier.	Once	more,	Anarkali’s	lovely	face	swam	before	him,	warm,	vital	and
alive.	Except	that	by	now	she	would	be	dead.	As	he	watched,	her	face	seemed	to	tauten	and	her	skin	to
shrivel	 away,	 exposing	 her	 skull,	 which	 slowly	 crumbled	 to	 dust,	 leaving	 only	 two	 bright	 blue	 eyes	 to
gaze	on	him	reproachfully	for	a	moment	before	they	also	dissolved	into	the	darkness.
Salim	woke	with	a	start,	clutching	at	his	bedclothes.	Guilt	at	Anarkali’s	fate	still	weighed	on	him	like	a
stone,	exacerbated	by	his	realisation	after	many	sleepless	nights	that	she	had	simply	been	an	intoxicating
plaything	 whom	 it	 had	 flattered	 his	 vanity	 to	 steal	 from	 Akbar.	 Perhaps	 if	 he	 had	 truly	 loved	 her	 his
actions	 would	 seem	 less	 despicable	 to	 him.	 But	 he	 had	 carelessly	 and	 greedily	 helped	 himself	 to
Anarkali,	another	human	being,	with	no	more	thought	than	if	he’d	been	plucking	the	ripest	mango	from	the
tree	or	the	most	tempting	sweetmeat	from	the	dish.	Among	his	few	comforts	in	his	restless	hours	had	been
that	–	at	least	according	to	the	message	that	had	reached	him	from	Hamida	three	days	after	he	had	ridden
out	 from	 Lahore	 –	 Anarkali	 would	 not	 have	 suffered	 for	 long.	 His	 resourceful	 grandmother	 had	 written
that	she	had	found	a	way	of	smuggling	a	phial	of	poison	to	her	as	he	had	begged	her	to.	He	hoped	this	was
true	and	that	his	grandmother	was	not	merely	seeking	to	console	him.
The	enormity	of	what	had	happened	and	its	consequences	swept	over	him	once	more.	His	melancholy
thoughts	 turned	 to	 his	 own	 position,	 hundreds	 of	 miles	 from	 his	 family	 and	 the	 centre	 of	 power	 at	 the
court,	and	on	his	way	to	banishment	beyond	the	Khyber	Pass	at	the	very	edge	of	the	Moghul	empire.	Not
only	had	he	caused	Anarkali’s	death	by	his	lustful	provoking	of	his	father	but	there	was	little	chance	now
that	he	would	fulfil	Shaikh	Salim	Chishti’s	prophecy	that	one	day	he	would	become	emperor.	Surely	all
his	hopes	and	expectations	were	dust	.	.	.	If	his	half-brothers	had	even	a	shred	of	ambition	they	would	be
able	to	profit	from	his	absence	to	promote	their	claims	to	Akbar	above	his.	And	what	if	his	father	were	to
die	 suddenly?	 Abul	 Fazl	 and	 his	 cronies	 would	 have	 settled	 the	 succession	 before	 news	 of	 his	 father’s
death	had	even	reached	him.
As	the	howling	wind	began	to	buffet	and	bow	the	heavy	fabric	of	his	tent	Salim,	in	an	effort	to	distract
himself	 from	 such	 depressing	 thoughts,	 started	 to	 plan	 his	 onward	 journey.	 Yesterday	 he	 and	 his	 three
hundred	and	fifty	men	had	crossed	the	cold	churning	waters	of	the	Indus	at	Attock.	A	young	pack	elephant
had	 panicked	 when	 the	 raft	 on	 which	 it	 was	 standing	 had	 collided	 with	 another	 in	 midstream.	 It	 had
tumbled	in	and	the	strong	currents	had	carried	it	away,	still	trumpeting	in	terror,	together	with	its	load	of
precious	cooking	equipment.	Yet	despite	the	dangers	the	remainder	of	the	party	had	crossed	safely	to	the
north	bank.
It	had	been	purple	dusk	when	the	last	raft	had	been	secured	and	unloaded.	The	wind	had	already	been
pushing	rain	clouds	across	the	sky	as	he	had	given	the	order	to	make	camp	immediately	among	the	mud
banks	and	sandy	hillocks	bordering	the	great	river.	Today	he	would	allow	his	men,	tired	by	the	strenuous
river	 crossing,	 to	 sleep	 later	 than	 usual	 before	 breaking	 their	 makeshift	 camp	 to	 begin	 the	 next	 stage	 of

D

their	journey	into	exile	–	on	to	Peshawar	and	the	entrance	to	the	Khyber	Pass,	places	familiar	to	him	only
through	the	tales	of	his	grandmother	and	those	commanders	who	had	served	in	the	region.
Salim’s	eyelids	were	feeling	heavy,	but	just	as	he	began	to	fall	asleep	a	scream	brought	him	to	instant
wakefulness.	 Was	 it	 simply	 some	 animal	 meeting	 its	 death	 in	 the	 teeth	 of	 a	 predator	 or	 was	 it	 human?
Moments	 later	 another	 cry	 followed	 by	 a	 shout	 of	 ‘To	 arms’	 banished	 all	 doubt.	 His	 camp	 was	 under
attack.
Salim	flung	aside	his	bedding	and	was	quickly	on	his	feet,	struggling	into	his	clothes	and	grabbing	a
Persian	 sword	 strengthened	 on	 either	 side	 of	 the	 steel	 blade	 with	 gold-inlaid	 languets	 that	 had	 been	 a
parting	gift	from	Hamida.	As	he	emerged	from	his	tent	some	of	his	bodyguards	were	staring	out	into	the
darkness.	Others	were	clustered,	with	torches	guttering	in	the	wind	and	rain,	bending	over	two	of	their
companions.	One	was	crying	pitifully	as	he	clawed	at	the	arrow	protruding	from	his	abdomen.	The	other
was	still.
‘Extinguish	those	torches,’	yelled	Salim.	‘They	only	serve	to	make	you	targets.	More	of	you	will	be	hit.
Try	to	accustom	your	eyes	to	the	darkness.’
His	instructions	were	too	late	for	a	third	guard	who	was	struck	in	the	back	by	another	hail	of	arrows
and	collapsed,	heels	kicking	convulsively,	into	the	mud.	The	torches	were	quickly	doused	in	some	of	the
puddles.
‘Where	are	Zahed	Butt	and	Suleiman	Beg?’
‘I’m	here,	Highness,’	shouted	Zahed	Butt,	the	captain	of	his	guard.
‘Me	too,’	called	Suleiman	Beg,	ducking	out	of	a	neighbouring	tent	and	buckling	on	his	sword	as	he	did
so.	All	the	time,	other	men	were	running	up,	splashing	through	the	mud	and	glancing	nervously	around	as
they	pulled	on	the	last	pieces	of	their	equipment.
‘What’s	happening?	Which	direction	did	the	arrows	come	from?’	demanded	Salim.
‘The	arrows	are	coming	from	the	east,	from	along	the	riverbank,	but	it’s	impossible	to	tell	the	enemy’s
strength.	I’ve	already	sent	some	of	the	sentries	who	were	guarding	your	tent	to	investigate	.	.	.’	said	Zahed
Butt,	but	before	he	could	finish	speaking	two	more	volleys	of	arrows	crashed	into	the	centre	of	the	camp
through	the	murk	and	rain.	As	if	in	direct	contradiction	of	his	words,	one	came	from	the	west	and	the	other
from	the	north.	Another	man	fell,	hit	in	the	back	of	his	left	thigh	by	what	could	only	be	a	lucky	shot.	In	the
wind	and	the	darkness	accuracy	was	impossible.
Questions	 raced	 through	 Salim’s	 mind.	 The	 unknown,	 unseen	 enemy	 was	 attempting	 to	 surround	 his
camp.	 Why?	 If	 they	 were	 mere	 dacoits	 wouldn’t	 they	 sneak	 directly	 towards	 the	 baggage	 wagons	 and
horse	 lines	 to	 make	 off	 with	 what	 plunder	 they	 could	 before	 escaping	 back	 into	 the	 night	 as	 quickly	 as
possible?	Could	he	himself	be	the	target	of	the	attack?	Salim	shuddered.	Was	it	beyond	belief	that	Abul
Fazl,	with	or	without	his	father’s	consent,	should	have	sent	orders	for	him	to	meet	with	an	‘accident’,	just
as	had	befallen	Bairam	Khan	earlier	in	Akbar’s	reign?
Whatever	 the	 case,	 his	 men	 were	 looking	 to	 him	 for	 orders	 and	 they	 must	 not	 look	 in	 vain.	 Thinking
quickly,	he	commanded,	‘Let	us	push	a	new	perimeter	outward	from	here	to	make	contact	with	the	enemy
or	 with	 any	 of	 our	 pickets	 who	 survive.	 We	 mustn’t	 lose	 touch	 with	 each	 other,	 so	 it	 is	 every	 man’s
responsibility	to	keep	his	comrade	on	the	right	in	view.	I	will	lead	the	centre	towards	the	baggage	and
horse	lines.	You,	Suleiman	Beg,	command	in	the	east	while	you,	Zahed	Butt,	take	the	west.	Make	as	little
noise	as	possible.’
Quickly	 Salim’s	 men	 sorted	 themselves	 into	 a	 rough	 line	 and	 drawing	 their	 weapons	 began	 to	 fan
outwards.	The	two	ends	of	the	line	hurried	to	make	contact	with	the	riverbank	but	the	centre,	led	by	Salim,
proceeded	more	slowly	as	they	slipped	and	scrambled	up	and	over	mud	banks	which	suddenly	loomed
from	 the	 darkness	 in	 front	 of	 them.	 As	 Salim	 breasted	 the	 top	 of	 one	 large	 bank,	 his	 foot	 caught	 on

something	soft	–	the	body	of	one	of	his	sentries,	sprawled	face	downwards.	Salim	stumbled	and	in	trying
to	steady	himself	lost	his	balance	completely	and	fell	backwards,	arms	flailing,	to	land	awkwardly	in	the
mud.	His	fall	probably	saved	his	life,	because	as	he	struggled	to	get	up	arrows	hissed	through	the	air	two
feet	above	him	and	the	men	who	had	been	on	either	side	of	him	and	were	now	on	the	crest	were	hit,	one	to
fall	forward	with	a	strangled	cry	down	the	bank	in	the	direction	the	arrows	came	from,	the	other	to	slump
to	his	knees	with	a	shaft	in	his	shoulder.
Salim	grabbed	that	man	and	pulled	him	down	behind	the	mud	bank.	‘Take	cover,’	he	shouted	to	the	rest
of	his	troops.	But	a	great	battle	cry	from	the	darkness	drowned	his	words	and	suddenly	assailants	were
rushing	at	his	men	all	along	the	line.	One	giant	of	a	man	threw	himself	at	Salim,	sword	outstretched.	Salim
parried	his	lunge	then	seized	his	sword	arm	and	dragged	him	down	on	to	the	slope	of	the	bank.	Rolling
over	and	over,	the	two	men	slipped	down	to	its	base.	The	giant	had	lost	his	weapon	but	was	grasping	with
his	great	hands	for	Salim’s	throat.	However,	Salim	had	retained	his	grip	on	his	Persian	sword	and	as	thick
fingers	tightened	on	his	windpipe	he	thrust	the	blade	deep	into	his	enemy’s	side.	Almost	instantly	he	felt
warm	blood	ooze	from	his	assailant	whose	grip	relaxed.	Quickly	heaving	the	weight	of	the	dying	body	off
him	Salim	got	back	to	his	feet,	clutching	his	bruised	throat	and	gasping	for	breath.
Everywhere	the	fighting	was	fierce	and	hand-to-hand.	Looking	up,	Salim	saw	just	to	his	left	and	above
him	on	the	top	of	the	mud	bank	a	tall	man,	obviously	a	commander,	waving	a	scimitar	to	urge	more	of	the
enemy	into	the	attack.	Yanking	a	foot-long	serrated	throwing	dagger	from	his	belt,	Salim	took	careful	aim,
pulled	 back	 his	 arm	 and	 sent	 the	 knife	 whirling	 end	 over	 end	 through	 the	 damp	 air	 towards	 the	 officer
who,	seeing	it	at	the	last	moment,	tried	to	dodge	aside,	only	for	it	to	catch	him	a	glancing	blow	to	the	flesh
of	his	upper	left	arm.	Undaunted,	he	rushed	headlong	down	the	mud	bank	towards	Salim,	slashing	with	his
curved	sword	as	he	came	and	parting	the	air	just	in	front	of	Salim’s	face	as	he	in	turn	leapt	backwards.	As
the	officer’s	impetus	carried	him	onwards,	Salim	stuck	out	his	foot	to	trip	him	and	he	sprawled	head	first
into	the	mud.	Gripping	the	hilt	of	his	Persian	sword	with	both	hands,	Salim	brought	it	down	vertically	into
the	nape	of	his	opponent’s	neck,	killing	him	instantly.
Twisting	out	his	sword	and	in	the	process	severing	the	officer’s	head,	Salim	paused	only	to	grab	the
man’s	scimitar	to	replace	his	throwing	dagger.	Then,	a	weapon	in	each	hand,	he	ran	towards	where,	in	the
growing	grey	light	of	dawn,	he	saw	one	of	his	Rajput	bodyguards	trying	to	hold	off	two	attackers.	Flinging
himself	forward,	his	Persian	sword	stretched	out	like	a	lance	before	him,	he	stabbed	the	first	of	the	men	in
the	fleshy	part	of	his	buttocks.	Turning,	the	wounded	man	slashed	wildly	with	his	knife	at	Salim,	ripping
the	sleeve	of	his	tunic	and	grazing	his	right	forearm.	Salim	swung	the	scimitar	in	his	left	hand.	Although	it
was	 a	 clumsy	 stroke	 with	 the	 wrong	 hand	 with	 an	 unfamiliar	 weapon,	 the	 scimitar’s	 balance	 was	 good
and	its	blade	sharp.	It	bit	deep	into	the	man’s	side	and	he	collapsed,	to	be	finished	off	by	the	Rajput	who
had	in	the	meantime	disposed	of	his	other	opponent.
By	now,	many	of	the	attackers	were	turning	to	flee,	and	as	he	scrambled	to	the	top	of	one	of	the	mud
banks	Salim	saw	that	some	of	them	were	heading	for	the	horse	lines	about	a	hundred	yards	away,	where
the	first	arrivals	were	already	desperately	trying	to	cut	through	ropes	to	steal	mounts	to	hasten	their	flight.
‘Follow	me!	We	must	drive	our	enemies	away	from	the	horses	to	prevent	as	many	of	them	escaping	as
we	 can,’	 shouted	 Salim	 as	 he	 slipped	 and	 skidded	 down	 the	 steep	 mud	 bank	 and	 ran,	 legs	 pumping,
through	the	puddles	towards	the	long	lines	of	horses.
Seeing	 him	 approach,	 a	 short,	 stocky,	 purple-turbaned	 man	 who	 had	 already	 cut	 the	 tether	 of	 a	 black
and	white	horse	and	was	struggling	to	sever	the	rope	hobbling	its	front	legs,	pulled	his	double	bow	from
his	 shoulder,	 fitted	 an	 arrow	 to	 the	 string	 and	 fired.	 The	 arrow	 missed	 Salim	 by	 inches.	 As	 the	 man
fumbled	with	nervous	fingers	to	fit	another,	Salim	was	almost	upon	him,	but	before	he	could	grab	him	to
grapple	him	to	the	ground	he	threw	aside	his	bow	and	ducked	beneath	the	horse’s	belly.	Salim	thrust	at

him	with	his	sword	as	he	went	but	missed.
Spooked	by	the	noise	and	commotion	around	it,	the	horse	skittered	in	fright.	Suddenly	the	hobble	on	its
front	legs,	already	half	cut	through,	snapped.	Immediately	the	animal	reared	up	on	its	hind	legs,	front	legs
lashing	out	wildly.	One	flailing	hoof	caught	the	purple-turbaned	man	in	the	pit	of	his	stomach	and	he	fell
doubled	 up,	 only	 to	 receive	 another	 hoofblow	 to	 the	 back	 of	 his	 head	 which	 knocked	 off	 his	 turban,
fractured	his	skull	and	left	him	unconscious	and	bleeding	heavily.	A	quick	glance	showed	Salim	that	his
opponent’s	 life	 was	 ebbing	 and	 he	 posed	 no	 further	 threat.	 Taking	 care	 to	 avoid	 the	 flailing	 hooves,	 he
succeeded	in	grabbing	the	black	and	white	horse’s	halter.	Holding	on	to	its	threshing	head	with	one	hand
and	stroking	its	neck	with	the	other,	he	spoke	softly	to	the	animal	which	quickly	calmed.	After	what	could
have	been	no	more	than	a	minute	or	two	Salim	was	able	to	scramble	on	to	its	back.
Guiding	the	animal	as	best	as	he	could	with	his	hands,	knees	and	feet,	he	urged	it	after	a	group	of	his
enemies	 riding	 bareback	 like	 himself	 towards	 a	 range	 of	 low	 hills	 two	 or	 three	 miles	 away.	 He	 was
quickly	joined	by	a	dozen	of	his	bodyguards.	At	first	they	seemed	to	be	making	no	headway	in	closing	the
gap	between	them	and	their	hard-galloping	opponents,	but	then	one	of	the	leading	riders’	horses	slipped
slightly	as	it	jumped	a	small	stream.	Since	the	rider	had	no	saddle	or	reins	it	was	enough	to	propel	him
over	 the	 horse’s	 head	 on	 to	 the	 ground,	 where	 he	 rolled	 over	 and	 over.	 Instead	 of	 galloping	 on,	 at	 a
shouted	command	from	another	of	the	foremost	riders	–	who	appeared	to	be	the	leader	of	the	little	force
of	no	more	than	eight	or	nine	men	–	they	wheeled	their	mounts	as	best	they	could	to	attempt	to	rescue	their
fallen	comrade	before	confronting	Salim	and	their	other	pursuers.
The	 leader	 drew	 his	 sword	 and	 kicked	 his	 mount	 –	 a	 chestnut	 –	 towards	 Salim.	 As	 the	 two	 riders
closed,	each	swung	his	sword	at	the	other.	Both	missed	and	they	strove	to	bring	their	mounts	round	in	a
wide	 circle	 to	 face	 each	 other	 again.	 Both	 succeeded	 in	 making	 the	 turn,	 and	 this	 time	 as	 they	 passed
Salim	flung	himself	from	his	horse’s	back	and	managed	to	pull	his	opponent	from	his	mount.	The	two	men
hit	the	earth	with	a	thump	and	the	impact	sent	their	swords	flying	from	their	hands.	Salim	tasted	blood	as
he	bit	his	tongue.
However,	they	quickly	staggered	to	their	feet	and	closed,	wrestling	each	other.	As	they	swayed	to	and
fro,	 struggling	 for	 advantage,	 Salim’s	 unknown	 enemy	 tried	 to	 pull	 a	 small	 dagger	 from	 his	 belt.	 Salim
head-butted	 him	 hard.	 The	 man’s	 nose	 broke	 with	 a	 satisfying	 crunch	 and	 he	 went	 reeling	 backwards.
While	he	was	still	dazed,	Salim	grabbed	the	hand	in	which	the	man	was	still	gripping	the	knife	and	with	a
quick	twist	of	his	wrist	sent	it	spinning	from	his	grasp.	Then	he	punched	him	twice	in	his	already	bleeding
face,	splitting	his	lip	and	knocking	out	a	tooth	before	kicking	him	with	his	booted	foot	in	the	groin	with	all
the	force	he	could	muster.	As	his	opponent	doubled	up,	Salim	brought	both	fists	down	on	the	back	of	his
neck,	knocking	him	to	the	ground	once	more.	Glancing	round	quickly,	Salim	retrieved	his	Persian	sword
and	 held	 it	 to	 his	 anguished	 opponent’s	 throat.	 As	 he	 did	 so,	 he	 saw	 that	 most	 of	 the	 retreating	 enemy
riders	were	down	or	had	surrendered.	As	far	as	he	could	make	out	through	the	bloody	mess	of	his	face,
his	enemy	was	a	young	man.	‘Who	are	you?’	Salim	asked,	stepping	back	a	pace	or	two	and	half	lowering
his	sword.	‘And	why	did	you	attack	my	camp?’
‘I	am	Hassan,	the	eldest	son	of	the	Raja	of	Galdid,’	he	answered,	spitting	out	pieces	of	broken	tooth	as
he	did	so.	‘I	attacked	your	camp	because	I	knew	that	it	must	contain	some	important	Moghul	dignitary	and
I	wanted	to	take	him	hostage.’
‘Why?’
‘To	trade	for	my	father	who	is	imprisoned	in	the	fortress	of	Murzad.’
‘For	what	crime?’
‘For	loyalty	to	Sikaudar	Shah,	the	rightful	claimant	to	the	throne	of	Hindustan.	After	Sikaudar	Shah’s
death	at	Moghul	hands,	my	father	still	refused	to	accept	alien	Moghul	rule	.	.	.’	Hassan	paused	to	wipe	his

bloody	mouth	and	nose	with	the	back	of	his	hand	before	continuing,	‘He	took	to	the	hills,	living	the	life	of
a	nomadic	raider.	For	decades	he	survived,	if	he	didn’t	prosper.	But	six	weeks	ago	he	was	lured	into	a
trap	by	the	local	Moghul	commander	and	captured.’
‘Couldn’t	you	see	your	father’s	resistance	was	futile?’
‘I	knew	it	and	I	said	so,	but	he	is	my	father.	I	owe	him	my	existence	and	my	loyalty	–	however	wrongheaded	he	is	–	just	as	I	owed	it	to	him	to	attempt	to	secure	his	release	as	best	I	could.’
‘His	story	is	true,	Highness,’	said	Zahed	Butt,	who	had	just	ridden	up.	‘I	have	many	relations	in	this
region	and	the	family	is	well	known.’
‘Highness?’	queried	Hassan	through	a	froth	of	blood.	‘Who	are	you?’
‘You	really	don’t	know,	do	you?	I	am	Salim,	son	of	the	Emperor	Akbar.’
Hearing	these	words	Hassan	reacted	instantly,	twisting	and	scrabbling	towards	where	his	knife	still	lay
on	the	ground	about	ten	feet	away.	Before	he	had	covered	half	the	distance,	Salim	thrust	his	sharp	Persian
sword	deep	into	his	side,	sliding	between	his	ribs.	Blood	spurted	on	to	the	wet	ground	and	moments	later
Hassan,	the	loyal	son,	was	dead.	Salim	was	left	to	continue	his	journey	into	the	exile	inflicted	by	his	own
father	for	his	disrespect.
Snow	was	falling.	Though	it	was	only	the	first	week	of	October,	winter	seemed	to	have	come	early	to	the
lonely	 rocky	 passes	 southeast	 of	 Kabul.	 Soon	 the	 snow	 would	 block	 any	 return	 to	 Hindustan,	 Salim
thought,	 even	 in	 the	 unlikely	 event	 that	 his	 father	 should	 relent.	 The	 previous	 evening	 a	 young	 Afghani
wounded	 at	 the	 skirmish	 on	 the	 Indus	 had	 suffered	 frostbite	 in	 his	 left	 foot	 after	 his	 leg	 had	 been
immobilised	in	a	splint	to	allow	a	fracture	to	heal.	The	man	–	a	native	of	Kabul	–	had	been	a	fool	to	insist
on	 continuing	 towards	 his	 homeland	 rather	 than	 remaining	 in	 Peshawar	 to	 recuperate.	 However,	 he	 had
persuaded	 the	 hakims	 to	 use	 an	 old	 Afghan	 remedy	 and	 pack	 warm	 animal	 dung	 round	 the	 frostbitten
member.	 Much	 to	 Salim’s	 and	 the	 hakims’	 surprise	 it	 seemed	 to	 be	 working.	 The	 foot	 had	 seemed	 less
white	and	blotched	a	few	hours	later.
Salim’s	 emerald-green	 face	 cloth	 slipped	 for	 a	 moment	 and	 the	 bitter	 wind	 nipped	 his	 own	 exposed
flesh.	 Despite	 his	 thick,	 pustin,	 sheepskin	 jacket,	 he	 felt	 chilled	 to	 the	 core	 and	 Suleiman	 Beg’s	 lips
looked	blue	with	cold	beneath	the	luxuriant	dark	moustache	he	had	grown	over	the	past	weeks,	of	which
he	was	inordinately	proud.	Snow	was	beginning	to	fall	thickly	now,	the	flakes	whipping	around	them.	The
head	of	Salim’s	grey	horse	went	down	as	its	forelegs	slipped	on	the	frozen	ground,	almost	unseating	him.
Leaning	back	in	the	saddle	he	pulled	hard	at	the	reins	and	the	weary	animal	managed	to	right	itself	just	as
Salim	caught	what	he	thought	was	the	sound	of	hoofbeats	ahead.
‘Halt.	I	heard	something.	Zahed	Butt,	take	a	detachment	forward	to	investigate,’	he	yelled	to	the	captain
of	his	guard.	‘Order	the	rest	of	the	column	to	take	up	defensive	positions	around	the	baggage	wagons.’
‘Who	do	you	think	it	is?’	Suleiman	Beg	asked.
‘I	don’t	know,	but	we	can’t	take	any	risks.’
As	 Zahed	 Butt	 cantered	 off	 into	 the	 snow	 at	 the	 head	 of	 a	 dozen	 soldiers,	 Salim	 frowned.	 Lawless
bands	infested	these	passes	but	surely	even	they	might	baulk	at	attacking	an	imperial	force	increased	to
five	hundred	well-armed	men	by	the	addition	of	recruits	from	the	clans	around	Peshawar.	War	was	these
clansmen’s	 trade.	 All	 were	 well	 mounted	 on	 shaggy-haired	 ponies	 bred	 to	 withstand	 the	 winter
conditions,	 and	 well	 armed.	 Most	 carried	 long-barrelled	 muskets	 strapped	 to	 their	 saddles	 beside	 their
lances.	He	checked	his	own	weapons	–	his	Persian	sword	and	two	daggers,	one	a	throwing	weapon,	all
slung	round	his	waist,	and	a	double	battleaxe	strapped	to	his	saddle.	A	qorchi	 was	 carrying	 his	 musket
and	his	bow	and	arrows,	though	in	the	blinding	blizzard	gun	and	bow	alike	would	be	almost	useless	with

only	fleeting	indistinct	shadows	to	aim	at.
The	wind	was	growing	fiercer,	howling	down	the	narrow	pass.	Salim’s	shivering	horse	whinnied	its
discomfort	and,	lowering	its	head	once	more,	pressed	closer	to	Suleiman	Beg’s	mount.	Salim	tightened
his	 grip	 on	 the	 reins	 again.	 If	 anything	 was	 amiss	 ahead	 he	 must	 be	 ready	 –	 better	 prepared	 to	 meet	 an
attack	than	on	the	Indus	.	.	.	Anxious	minutes	passed	as	he	peered	into	the	whiteness,	straining	his	eyes	and
ears	for	any	sight	or	sound	which	might	betray	what	lay	ahead.	Then,	above	the	wind,	he	thought	he	faintly
made	out	three	short	blasts	of	a	trumpet	–	the	agreed	signal	that	all	was	well.	A	minute	or	two	later	he
heard	 them	 again,	 nearer	 and	 more	 distinct,	 and	 soon	 afterwards	 his	 soldiers	 re-emerged	 from	 the
whirling	snow.	As	they	drew	closer,	Salim	saw	about	a	dozen	newcomers	riding	close	behind	them.
‘Highness.’	Zahed	Butt	trotted	up,	his	bushy	beard	and	his	sheepskin	cap	alike	crusted	with	snow	and
his	breath	rising	in	frosty	spirals.	‘Saif	Khan,	the	Governor	of	Kabul,	has	sent	an	escort	to	guide	you	on
the	final	stages	of	your	journey.’
Salim’s	shoulders	dropped	as	he	relaxed.	His	long	ride	into	exile	was	nearly	ended.

Chapter	25

The	Treasurer	of	Kabul

he	citadel’s	massive	walls	–	at	least	ten	feet	thick	in	most	places	–	were	a	good	defence	against	the
winter	storms	that	had	continued	unabated	since	Salim’s	arrival	in	Kabul	two	days	ago,	and	a	fire	of
crackling	khanjak	logs	was	burning	in	the	hearth,	now	and	then	spitting	showers	of	red-gold	sparks.	All
the	same	Salim	felt	chilled	to	his	very	bones.	He	drew	closer	to	the	fire	to	warm	his	hands	as	he	waited
for	Saif	Khan,	who	had	gone	to	give	instructions	to	his	steward,	to	return.
While	attendants	piled	yet	more	wood	on	the	fire,	Salim	turned	his	head	to	gaze	at	the	low	platform	at
the	far	end	of	the	long	room	and	the	throne	which	stood	on	it.	Its	red	velvet	cushions	were	faded	and	its
gilded	feet	and	high	curved	back	a	little	tarnished.	In	the	distant	Moghul	palaces	of	Lahore	or	Fatehpur
Sikri	far	beyond	the	frozen	passes	such	a	shabby	item	would	be	unthinkable,	but	Salim	looked	at	it	with
respect.	 This	 was	 where	 his	 great-grandfather,	 the	 future	 first	 Moghul	 emperor,	 had	 sat	 as	 the	 King	 of
Kabul	to	dispense	justice.	Perhaps	it	was	from	this	very	seat	that	he	had	announced	his	intention	to	invade
Hindustan	and	claim	it	for	the	Moghuls.	In	the	flickering	light	of	torches	in	sconces	high	on	the	rough	stone
walls,	Salim	could	almost	conjure	an	image	of	Babur	deep	in	thought,	his	sword	Alamgir	at	his	waist.	If
Babur	could	leave	Kabul	to	satisfy	his	ambitions	perhaps	it	was	still	possible	for	his	great-grandson	to	do
the	same	and	fulfil	the	Sufi	seer’s	prophecy,	Salim	comforted	himself.	Just	as	soon	as	these	snows	eased
he	would	visit	Babur’s	grave	in	its	hillside	garden	above	Kabul	.	.	.
The	 bejewelled	 luxury	 of	 the	 Moghul	 palaces	 of	 Hindustan	 with	 their	 intricately	 carved	 sandstone,
scented	fountains	and	elaborate	ritual	seemed	separated	by	more	than	distance	from	this	stark	stronghold
where	 Babur	 had	 nurtured	 his	 plans	 of	 conquest.	 Of	 course,	 the	 Kabul	 citadel,	 perched	 on	 a	 rocky
promontory	above	the	town,	had	never	been	intended	as	a	palace	to	impress	the	cultured.	It	had	been	built
to	 awe	 the	 local	 tribes	 and	 to	 control	 the	 trade	 routes.	 Kabul’s	 wealth	 depended	 on	 the	 vast,	 swaying
caravans	 that	 passed	 through	 each	 year	 with	 their	 cargos	 of	 jewels,	 sugar,	 cloth	 and	 spices,	 and	 that
wealth	must	be	protected.	Even	now,	the	Kabul	revenues	were	important	to	the	Moghul	treasury.
‘Forgive	me,	Highness,	for	leaving	you	alone.’	Saif	Khan	returned	with	a	swish	of	his	fox-lined	robes.
He	 was	 a	 stout,	 genial-looking	 middle-aged	 man,	 though	 a	 long	 white	 scar	 on	 his	 left	 cheek	 and	 some
ragged	frills	of	shiny,	pinkish	flesh	where	his	left	ear	had	been	would	have	shown	he	was	a	fighter	even	if
Salim	 hadn’t	 known	 of	 his	 years	 of	 campaigns	 on	 the	 empire’s	 frontiers	 which	 had	 led	 his	 father	 to
appoint	him	governor.	‘If	you	will	allow	me,	I	would	like	to	introduce	the	other	members	of	my	council	to
you.’
‘Of	course.’
Saif	Khan	whispered	to	an	attendant	who	at	once	went	to	the	door	and	ushered	in	the	six	counsellors.
The	governor	introduced	each	in	turn	–	the	master-of-horse,	the	chief	quartermaster,	the	commander	of	the
garrison	.	.	.	As	they	bowed,	Salim	surveyed	them	with	only	polite	interest.	But	then	Saif	Khan	uttered	a
name	that	made	him	pay	more	attention.	‘This	is	Ghiyas	Beg,	Treasurer	of	Kabul.’	Ghiyas	Beg	.	.	.	where
had	 he	 heard	 that	 name	 before?	 Salim	 stared	 at	 the	 tall,	 angular	 man	 bending	 before	 him.	 As	 the	 man
raised	his	head	again	and	Salim	looked	into	his	fine-boned	face	–	less	starved	than	when	he	had	last	seen

T

it	 but	 still	 gaunt	 –	 the	 years	 rolled	 back.	 He	 was	 a	 boy	 again,	 listening	 transfixed	 in	 Fatehpur	 Sikri	 to
Ghiyas	Beg	standing	before	Akbar	and	telling	his	tale	of	his	desperate	flight	from	Persia,	of	how	he	had
nearly	abandoned	his	newborn	daughter	beneath	a	tree	.	.	.
‘I	remember	when	you	came	to	Fatehpur	Sikri,	Ghiyas	Beg.’
‘I	am	honoured.’
‘How	are	your	family?’
‘All	in	good	health,	Highness.	The	mountain	air	of	Kabul	has	been	good	for	them.’
‘Including	your	daughter?’	Salim	was	struggling	to	remember	her	name.	‘Mehrunissa,	I	think	you	called
her?’
‘Indeed,	Highness.	Mehrunissa,	“Sun	Among	Women”.	She	is	well.’
‘You’ve	 clearly	 prospered	 here.	 My	 father	 sent	 you	 to	 Kabul	 as	 an	 assistant	 but	 now	 you	 are	 the
treasurer,’	Salim	said,	and	continued	a	little	awkwardly:	‘He	has	sent	me	to	Kabul	to	satisfy	myself	that	it
is	being	properly	governed	and	in	particular	that	all	the	revenues	are	being	correctly	accounted	for	and
sent	to	the	imperial	treasuries.’
‘I	will	stake	my	life	that	not	a	single	shahrukki	has	gone	astray.’
‘I	am	glad	to	hear	it,	but	I	will	still	need	to	inspect	your	records.’
‘Of	course,	Highness.	I	can	bring	my	ledgers	here,	or	if	you	prefer,	when	these	storms	ease,	perhaps
you	would	honour	my	home	with	a	visit?’
‘I	will.’
When	Salim	was	alone	with	the	governor	once	more	he	stared	for	a	while	into	the	flames.	Something
about	Ghiyas	Beg	intrigued	him,	just	as	it	had	the	first	time	he	had	seen	him.	The	smooth	words	falling	so
effortlessly	from	his	tongue	could	have	been	spoken	by	any	courtier.	However,	Salim	hadn’t	missed	the
look	on	Ghiyas	Beg’s	face	when	he	had	questioned	him	about	the	revenues.	The	Persian	seemed	deeply
protective	of	his	honour	.	.	.	or	was	he	being	suspiciously	over-vehement	in	his	protestations	of	injured
innocence?
Something	 his	 grandmother	 had	 once	 said	 about	 strange	 patterns	 in	 life	 –	 and	 about	 Ghiyas	 Beg	 in
particular	–	came	back	to	him.	Hadn’t	she	predicted	that	the	Persian	might	one	day	become	important	to
the	 Moghuls?	 But	 the	 question	 was	 how?	 For	 better	 or	 for	 worse?	 Looking	 up,	 he	 found	 Saif	 Khan
watching	him	curiously.	What	was	he	thinking?	That	here	was	the	wayward	son	of	the	emperor,	sent	to
Kabul	as	punishment	for	his	sins?	He	must	know	the	tour	of	inspection	was	a	mere	pretence	and	that	Salim
had	left	the	court	in	the	deepest	disgrace.	Gossip	travelled	quickly	even	if	Abul	Fazl	hadn’t	written	to	Saif
Khan	 as	 Salim	 was	 sure	 he	 had,	 perhaps	 even	 instructed	 him	 to	 provide	 reports	 on	 his	 behaviour.	 To
cover	his	confusion	he	asked,	‘Tell	me	more	about	Ghiyas	Beg.	Is	he	as	good	and	honest	a	treasurer	as	he
claims?’
‘The	emperor	has	no	better	servant	in	Kabul.	He	has	improved	the	way	in	which	tolls	are	levied	on	the
caravans	 and	 also	 the	 gathering	 of	 taxes	 from	 the	 towns	 and	 villages.	 During	 the	 five	 years	 that	 I	 have
been	governor,	he	has	increased	income	by	nearly	a	half.’
Perhaps	 Ghiyas	 Beg	 was	 as	 guileless	 as	 he	 had	 appeared	 today	 and	 in	 his	 original	 audience	 before
Akbar	all	those	years	ago,	Salim	thought.	He	realised	too	there	was	nothing	to	be	gained	from	continuing
his	inner	debate	about	whether	he	was	reporting	on	Saif	Khan’s	conduct	or	the	other	way	round.	He	must
behave	 as	 a	 conscientious	 inspector	 of	 the	 collection	 of	 his	 father’s	 taxes	 and	 the	 administration	 of	 his
province.	That	would	be	his	only	hope	of	securing	a	return	to	Akbar’s	favour.
The	 snow	 had	 ceased	 and	 a	 temporary	 thaw	 meant	 that	 the	 battlements	 of	 the	 citadel	 were	 no	 longer

covered	in	ice	when	Salim	rode	down	the	ramp,	outriders	ahead	and	Zahed	Butt	and	his	bodyguard	close
behind.	 He	 had	 invited	 Suleiman	 Beg	 to	 go	 with	 him	 to	 Ghiyas	 Beg’s	 house	 in	 the	 town	 below	 but	 his
milk-brother	had	laughingly	asked	to	be	excused	on	the	grounds	that	he	had	no	head	for	figures.
A	chill	wind	was	driving	small,	fleecy	white	clouds	across	a	pale	blue	winter	sky	as	Salim	approached
the	town	walls.	Beyond,	smoke	was	rising	from	the	caravanserais	where	only	a	few	hardy	travellers	were
billeted.	When	winter	was	over	and	all	the	passes	were	open	again,	Kabul	would	be	teeming	and	walking
its	 streets	 a	 man	 might	 hear	 twenty,	 perhaps	 thirty,	 different	 languages,	 or	 so	 Saif	 Khan	 had	 told	 him.
Unlike	 Suleiman	 Beg,	 Saif	 Khan	 had	 been	 eager	 to	 accompany	 Salim,	 as	 he	 always	 was	 wherever	 he
wanted	to	go,	but	Salim	was	suspicious	of	Saif	Khan’s	motives.	Was	he	trying	to	keep	an	eye	on	him?	In
any	case,	he	was	weary	of	the	governor	and	his	repetitive	stories	and	crude	jokes.	He	would	see	Ghiyas
Beg	alone.
Ghiyas	Beg’s	house	was	a	large	two-storey	building	occupying	one	side	of	a	tree-shaded	square.	The
treasurer,	 turbaned	 in	 green	 silk	 and	 flanked	 by	 attendants,	 was	 waiting	 outside	 to	 greet	 him	 and	 Salim
saw	that	a	length	of	purple	velvet	had	been	spread	from	the	marble	block	where	he	was	to	alight	over	the
puddles	on	the	thawing	ground	to	the	doors	of	polished	chestnut	wood	that	led	into	the	house.
‘Highness,	you	are	welcome.’	Ghiyas	Beg	waved	away	a	groom	and	himself	held	Salim’s	right	stirrup
as	he	dismounted.	‘Please	follow	me.’
Signalling	 his	 bodyguard	 and	 the	 other	 soldiers	 to	 remain	 outside,	 Salim	 accompanied	 Ghiyas	 Beg
through	 the	 doors	 and	 across	 a	 courtyard	 into	 a	 large,	 luxuriously	 furnished	 chamber	 in	 which	 two
braziers	of	coals	were	glowing.	Cream	brocade	hangings	covered	the	walls	while	bolsters	and	cushions
of	 sapphire-blue	 velvet	 were	 set	 against	 them.	 The	 carpets	 were	 soft,	 thick	 and	 richly	 coloured,	 better
than	any	in	the	citadel	–	in	fact,	the	best	Salim	had	seen	since	leaving	his	father’s	palace	in	Lahore.
‘You	live	well,’	he	said.	The	magnificence	of	Ghiyas	Beg’s	residence	had	reignited	his	doubts.	Even	if
he	 was	 the	 best	 tax	 collector	 Saif	 Khan	 had	 ever	 seen,	 was	 Ghiyas	 Beg	 still	 creaming	 off	 some	 of	 the
revenue	for	himself?
‘I	am	glad	you	like	my	home.	I’ve	tried	to	furnish	it	the	way	my	house	in	Persia	was,	importing	painted
and	patterned	tiles	and	so	forth.	So	many	caravans	pass	through	Kabul,	a	man	can	find	or	order	anything.
Please,	take	some	refreshment.	The	grapes	grown	around	Kabul	make	good	wine	–	almost	as	good	as	the
red	 wines	 of	 Ghazni	 to	 the	 south	 –	 or	 perhaps	 some	 rose-flavoured	 sherbet?	 My	 wife	 is	 skilled	 at
distilling	 the	 fragrance	 of	 the	 roses	 she	 grows	 so	 that	 even	 in	 the	 harshest	 months	 of	 winter	 we	 can	 be
reminded	that	the	summer	warmth	will	return.’
‘Thank	you.	Some	sherbet.’
An	attendant	knelt	before	Salim	with	a	bowl	of	water	in	which	to	rinse	his	hands	and	a	scented	towel
on	which	to	dry	them	while	another	poured	some	sherbet	into	a	silver	cup.	Salim	took	the	cup	and	drank.
Ghiyas	Beg	was	right.	The	sherbet	indeed	tasted	and	smelled	of	roses	and	of	summer.
‘I	have	the	ledgers	ready,	Highness.	What	do	you	want	to	examine	first?	The	caravan	revenues	or	the
village	taxes?’
‘A	little	later,’	said	Salim,	deciding	to	draw	Ghiyas	Beg	out	and	thus	perhaps	to	catch	him	off	his	guard.
‘First	tell	me	about	your	life	here.	I’m	curious.’
‘About	what	aspect,	Highness?’
‘You	 are	 a	 cultured,	 educated	 man.	 How	 do	 you	 manage	 to	 live	 in	 such	 a	 place	 as	 Kabul?	 What
possible	 satisfaction	 or	 interest	 can	 you	 find	 in	 its	 squabbling	 tribes,	 its	 blood	 feuds	 and	 its	 greedy
merchants?’
‘A	man	can	find	interest	in	anything	if	he	sets	his	mind	to	it.	And	remember,	Highness,	I’ve	cause	to	be
grateful	 even	 to	 be	 in	 such	 a	 remote	 place	 as	 this.	 When	 your	 father	 sent	 me	 and	 my	 family	 here,	 he

rescued	 us	 from	 penury	 and	 gave	 us	 hope.	 This	 may	 not	 be	 Isfahan	 or	 Lahore,	 but	 I	 have	 worked	 hard,
tried	 to	 do	 my	 duty,	 and	 I	 have	 prospered.	 The	 emperor	 pays	 his	 servants	 well.	 By	 now	 I	 am	 wealthy
enough	to	take	my	family	back	to	Persia	but	my	loyalty	is	to	your	father	and	I	will	stay	here	for	as	long	as	I
can	serve	him	well.	Perhaps	one	day	he	will	remember	me	and	appoint	me	to	a	post	in	one	of	his	great
cities	–	Delhi	or	Agra,	maybe.’
Ghiyas	Beg	seemed	almost	too	good	to	be	true,	thought	Salim.	‘And	if	not?’	he	asked.
‘I	am	content.	When	a	man	has	seen	death	reaching	out	for	himself	and	his	family	and	escapes,	he	learns
to	be	thankful	for	what	he	has	and	not	to	make	himself	unhappy	by	yearning	for	what	he	cannot	have.	That
is	a	lesson	to	us	all,	Highness,	whatever	our	station	in	life.’
Salim	 started.	 Ghiyas	 Beg	 wasn’t	 referring	 to	 his	 own	 position,	 was	 he?	 The	 treasurer’s	 expression
remained	respectful.	In	any	case,	he	himself	could	never	be	that	patient	and	philosophic,	Salim	thought.
Every	time	an	imperial	post	rider	clattered	up	the	ramp	into	the	Kabul	citadel,	his	leather	satchel	bulging
with	letters	and	despatches,	he	hoped	that	one	was	from	his	father	recalling	him	to	court,	but	so	far	he	had
received	 not	 one	 word	 from	 Akbar.	 The	 only	 official	 letters	 to	 him	 had	 been	 from	 Abul	 Fazl	 asking
nitpicking	questions	about	his	reports	on	subjects	such	as	the	state	of	Kabul’s	defences	or	the	condition	of
the	road	to	Kandahar.
‘Please	try	one	of	these	sweetmeats.	In	Persia	it	is	traditional	to	offer	them	to	our	guests.	My	wife	made
them	from	almonds	and	honey	with	her	own	hands.’
‘You	have	only	one	wife?’
‘She	is	like	a	part	of	me.	I	need	no	other.’
‘You	are	a	lucky	man.	Few	can	say	that,’	said	Salim,	thinking	how	much	Ghiyas	Beg’s	words	reminded
him	of	his	grandmother’s	description	of	her	marriage	to	his	grandfather,	Humayun.	‘But	doesn’t	your	wife
long	to	return	to	Persia?’
‘She	feels	as	I	do	that	we	should	be	content	with	our	lot.	God	has	been	merciful.’
Salim	 stared	 at	 the	 treasurer,	 impressed	 despite	 himself	 by	 the	 man’s	 quiet	 dignity	 and	 patience	 and
again	recalling	Hamida	and	how	she	had	often	told	him	that	their	troubles	had	only	strengthened	the	bonds
between	herself	and	Humayun.	He	could	only	wish	that	his	own	ties	with	any	of	his	wives	were	so	strong.
But	he	reminded	himself	he	had	come	to	Ghiyas	Beg’s	house	to	question	him	about	how	he	carried	out	his
responsibilities,	not	about	his	private	life.
‘Bring	me	your	ledgers,	Ghiyas	Beg,	and	explain	in	detail	how	you	levy	the	toll	on	the	caravans	that
pass	through	Kabul.	Saif	Khan	told	me	that	you	have	made	some	improvements	.	.	.’
The	warm	night	air	was	pungent	with	the	smell	of	dung	fires,	spices	and	baking	bread	as	the	citizens	of
Kabul	prepared	their	evening	meal	on	the	flat	roofs	of	the	houses	Salim	passed	on	his	way	through	the
streets.	Over	recent	weeks	as	spring	had	blossomed	he	had	been	so	many	times	to	Ghiyas	Beg’s	house	that
his	grey	stallion	could	probably	find	its	way	there	blindfolded.	‘What	do	you	and	that	old	man	find	to	talk
about?	You	spend	more	time	with	him	than	I	ever	did	with	my	father,’	Suleiman	Beg	had	asked	earlier	that
day,	 just	 as	 he	 had	 on	 many	 previous	 occasions.	 He	 was	 amazed	 that	 Salim	 sometimes	 preferred	 the
Persian’s	company	to	the	chance	to	hunt	wild	asses	or	go	hawking	in	the	hills	around	Kabul.
It	 was	 something	 Salim	 could	 not	 quite	 explain,	 even	 to	 himself.	 In	 Ghiyas	 Beg	 he	 had	 discovered	 a
cultured,	 civilised	 man	 –	 a	 man	 of	 ideas	 and	 spiritual	 depth	 who,	 he	 sensed,	 felt	 as	 imprisoned	 and
unfulfilled	as	he	did	but,	unlike	himself,	could	still	find	contentment.	His	visits	to	his	house	no	longer	had
anything	 to	 do	 with	 checking	 that	 the	 treasurer	 was	 efficient	 and	 honest	 and	 indeed	 a	 great	 asset	 to	 his
father.	Ghiyas	Beg	had	quickly	proved	his	records	accurate,	and	that	his	luxuriously	furnished	house	had

been	financed	by	the	salary	due	to	his	rank	and	a	few	trading	ventures	he	had	engaged	in	over	the	years.
However,	the	two	men	had	found,	despite	the	disparity	in	their	ages,	that	they	shared	many	interests,	from
the	natural	world	to	the	changing	style	of	miniature	painting	under	influences	from	Persia	and	Europe.
Tonight,	however,	was	different.	It	was	the	first	time	Ghiyas	Beg	had	invited	Salim	to	dine	at	his	house.
Emerging	from	a	street	so	narrow	that	the	upper	storeys	of	the	timber-framed	mud-brick	houses	on	each
side	almost	touched,	Salim	saw	that	the	square	where	the	treasurer	lived	was	ablaze	with	light.	Lanterns
of	coloured	glass	–	red,	green,	blue	and	yellow	–	swayed	from	the	boughs	of	budding	almond	and	apricot
trees.	On	either	side	of	the	entrance	to	the	house	stood	giant	candelabras	four	feet	high	in	which	burned	a
mass	of	candles.	Crystals	of	golden	frankincense	smouldered	in	jewelled	incense	burners.
Ghiyas	Beg	was,	as	usual,	waiting	to	greet	him,	dressed	more	magnificently	than	Salim	had	ever	seen
him.	 His	 silk	 robe	 was	 embroidered	 with	 flowers	 and	 butterflies	 and	 from	 a	 gold	 chain	 round	 his	 lean
waist	hung	an	ivory-hilted	dagger	in	a	coral	and	turquoise	inlaid	scabbard.	On	his	head	was	a	tall	velvet
cap	like	those	worn	by	the	envoys	from	the	Shah	of	Persia	Salim	remembered	seeing	at	Akbar’s	court.
‘Greetings,	Highness.	Please	follow	me	to	where	we	will	eat.’
Salim	followed	his	host	through	the	courtyard,	the	walls	of	which	were	covered	with	tiles	painted	with
cream	and	mauve	flowers,	and	down	a	passage	leading	into	a	second,	smaller	courtyard	spread	with	rugs.
A	silk	canopy	had	been	erected	against	one	wall,	beneath	which	was	a	low	divan	piled	with	cushions.	As
Salim	seated	himself	Ghiyas	Beg	clapped	his	hands	and	at	once	servants	appeared,	some	bringing	water
for	Salim	to	rinse	his	hands	while	others	spread	a	white	damask	cloth	over	which	they	sprinkled	dried
rose	petals.
‘I	have	had	dishes	prepared	from	my	Persian	homeland.	I	hope	you	will	like	them,’	Ghiyas	Beg	said.
The	food	was	some	of	the	most	delicious	Salim	had	ever	eaten.	Pheasants	simmered	in	a	pomegranate
sauce,	 lamb	 stuffed	 with	 apricots	 and	 pistachios,	 rice	 spiced	 with	 long	 golden	 strands	 of	 saffron	 and
sprinkled	with	pomegranate	seeds	bright	as	rubies,	hot	wafer-thin	bread	to	dip	into	pastes	of	smoked	and
pounded	 aubergines	 and	 chickpeas.	 Ghiyas	 Beg’s	 attendants	 kept	 his	 glass	 filled	 with	 wine	 from	 the
Khwaja	Khawan	Said	region	of	Kabul,	celebrated	for	its	fire	and	flavour.
Salim	noticed	that	the	treasurer	himself	ate	and	drank	sparingly	and	said	little	except	to	acknowledge
Salim’s	frequent	compliments.	But	when	the	dishes	had	been	cleared	away	and	grapes,	musk	melons	and
silvered	almonds	laid	before	them,	Ghiyas	Beg	said,	‘Highness,	I	have	a	favour	to	request.	May	I	present
my	wife	to	you?’
‘Of	course,’	Salim	replied,	realising	how	great	a	compliment	this	was	to	their	friendship.	Usually	only
male	relations	met	the	women	of	the	household.	He	had	been	wondering	whether	Ghiyas	Beg’s	wife	and
daughter	 had	 been	 watching	 through	 the	 fretted	 wooden	 screen	 he	 could	 see	 high	 in	 the	 wall	 opposite
where	he	was	sitting.
‘You	 are	 gracious,	 Highness.’	 Ghiyas	 Beg	 whispered	 to	 an	 attendant,	 who	 hastened	 away.	 A	 few
minutes	 later,	 a	 tall	 slight	 figure	 entered	 the	 courtyard	 through	 an	 arched	 doorway.	 She	 was	 veiled,	 but
above	the	gauzy	material	Salim	saw	a	pair	of	fine	eyes	and	a	wide,	smooth	forehead.	She	was	obviously
younger	than	Ghiyas	Beg	who,	as	she	touched	her	hand	to	her	breast	and	briefly	bowed	her	head,	said,
‘Highness,	this	is	Asmat,	my	wife.’
‘I	thank	you	for	your	hospitality,	Asmat.	I	have	not	tasted	better	food	since	coming	to	Kabul.’
‘You	 do	 us	 great	 honour,	 Highness.	 Many	 years	 ago	 your	 father	 the	 emperor	 saved	 our	 family	 from
poverty,	perhaps	worse.	I	am	glad	to	repay	even	a	tiny	portion	of	the	debt	we	owe	you.’	She	spoke	court
Persian	as	elegantly	as	her	husband,	in	a	voice	both	musical	and	low.
‘My	father	acquired	a	good	and	loyal	servant	when	he	sent	your	husband	here.	There	is	no	debt.’
Asmat	looked	towards	her	husband.	‘Highness,	we	have	another	request.	May	our	daughter	Mehrunissa

dance	for	you?	Her	teachers,	who	have	trained	her	in	the	Persian	style,	say	that	she	is	not	unskilled.’
‘Certainly.’	Salim	lay	back	against	the	cushions	and	took	another	sip	of	the	dark	red	wine.	He	would	be
intrigued	to	see	this	girl	who	had	been	abandoned	beneath	a	tree	to	the	jackals	and	the	elements.
A	trio	of	musicians	–	two	drummers	and	a	flautist	–	entered	the	courtyard.	The	drummers	at	once	struck
up	a	compelling	rhythm,	and	as	the	piper	put	his	instrument	to	his	lips	a	languorous	melody	issued	from	it.
Then	 came	 a	 tinkling	 of	 bells	 keeping	 perfect	 time	 with	 the	 musicians	 and	 Mehrunissa	 ran	 into	 the
courtyard.	 Like	 her	 mother	 she	 was	 veiled	 but	 above	 the	 veil	 her	 eyes	 were	 as	 large	 and	 lustrous	 as
Asmat’s.	She	was	wearing	a	loose	robe	of	blue	silk	the	colour	of	a	kingfisher’s	wing.	As	she	raised	her
arms	 and	 began	 to	 revolve,	 Salim	 saw	 that	 in	 each	 hand	 she	 was	 holding	 a	 golden	 ring	 hung	 with	 tiny
silver	bells.
For	a	moment	a	vision	of	the	last	woman	to	dance	before	him	–	Anarkali	–	swam	before	him,	bringing
with	 it	 the	 sense	 of	 shame	 and	 regret	 her	 memory	 still	 conjured.	 But	 Mehrunissa’s	 dance	 was	 unlike
anything	 Salim	 had	 ever	 seen	 in	 Hindustan,	 slow,	 graceful	 and	 controlled.	 Every	 gesture	 of	 her	 slender
hands	and	fingers,	the	way	she	held	her	head,	the	stately	sway	of	her	body	beneath	the	blue	silk,	the	beat
of	 her	 henna-painted	 feet	 on	 the	 ground,	 compelled	 attention.	 Salim	 leaned	 forward	 as	 the	 music	 grew
louder.	Mehrunissa	flung	back	her	head	as	if	filled	with	the	joy	of	the	dance	and	then	quite	suddenly	the
music	ceased	and	she	was	kneeling	decorously	at	his	feet.
‘That	 is	 one	 of	 the	 shah’s	 favourite	 dances,	 celebrating	 the	 coming	 of	 spring,’	 said	 Ghiyas	 Beg,	 face
soft	with	pride.
‘You	are	as	gifted	a	dancer	as	your	father	said.	Please	rise.’
Mehrunissa	got	gracefully	to	her	feet,	but	as	she	reached	to	push	back	a	stray	lock	of	shining	black	hair
she	caught	a	corner	of	her	veil	and	it	fell	away,	exposing	her	full	mouth,	a	small	straight	nose	and	the	soft
curve	 of	 her	 cheeks.	 For	 a	 moment	 she	 looked	 straight	 into	 Salim’s	 eyes	 before	 quickly	 refastening	 her
veil.
‘You	only	saw	her	for	a	few	moments.’
‘It	was	enough,	Suleiman	Beg.’
‘Perhaps	you	haven’t	had	a	woman	for	a	while.’
Salim	 glared	 at	 his	 milk-brother.	 Since	 leaving	 Lahore	 and	 his	 wives	 and	 haram,	 the	 memory	 of
Anarkali’s	tumbling	golden	hair	and	voluptuous	body	–	all	that	beauty	to	which	he	had	brought	such	ruin	–
had	curbed	his	desire,	it	was	true,	but	his	abstinence	had	certainly	not	been	total	and	wasn’t	why	he	felt
like	this.
‘Are	you	sure	it’s	not	because	for	some	unfathomable	reason	you	like	her	father?	You	think	her	mind
might	be	like	his	and	her	body	female	perfection.’	Suleiman	Beg	smiled	and	cracked	a	walnut	between	his
teeth,	flinging	the	shell	out	of	the	open	casement	in	Salim’s	apartments	overlooking	the	courtyard.	‘What’s
really	so	special	about	her?’
‘Everything.	The	way	she	moved	–	her	grace.	She	was	like	a	queen.’
‘Big	breasts?’
‘She’s	not	a	whore	from	the	bazaars.’
‘Then	I	repeat	my	question	because	I	just	don’t	understand.	From	what	you	say,	a	veiled	woman	did	a
brief	dance	for	you	and	all	of	a	sudden	your	loins	are	on	fire	.	.	.’
‘I	 saw	 her	 face.	 Suleiman	 Beg,	 it	 reminds	 me	 of	 how	 my	 grandmother	 speaks	 of	 Humayun’s	 feelings
when	he	first	saw	her.	There	was	something	about	it	.	.	.	I	can’t	get	her	out	of	my	mind.’
‘I	thought	you	said	she	was	veiled.’

‘For	a	moment	her	veil	slipped.’
‘That	was	clever	of	her.’
‘What	do	you	mean?’
‘She’s	the	daughter	of	a	petty	official	living	in	an	outpost	of	your	empire.’	Suleiman	Beg	spat	a	tough
piece	of	nut	on	to	the	floor	but	Salim	knew	it	was	Kabul	he’d	really	like	to	spit	on.	Suleiman	Beg	was
bored	here	and	couldn’t	wait	to	return	to	Hindustan.	‘That	was	her	chance	to	catch	your	eye.	Much	better
to	be	an	imperial	concubine	than	left	to	fester	here.’
Perhaps	Suleiman	Beg	was	right,	Salim	thought.	In	his	mind’s	eye	he	recaptured	that	moment	when	her
veil	had	slipped.	Had	it	been	by	design?	And	had	she	delayed	raising	it	again	just	long	enough	for	him	to
see	 her	 face?	 If	 so,	 then	 all	 to	 the	 good.	 It	 meant	 she	 wanted	 him	 too.	 He	 stood	 up.	 ‘I	 don’t	 desire	 her
merely	as	a	concubine.	I	wish	her	to	be	my	wife.’
Dusk	was	falling	when	an	attendant	brought	Salim	word	that	Ghiyas	Beg	had	come	to	the	citadel.	As	soon
as	the	Persian	was	shown	into	his	apartment,	Salim	said	eagerly,	‘Ghiyas	Beg,	I	summoned	you	here	not
as	 your	 prince	 but	 –	 or	 so	 I	 hope	 –	 as	 your	 future	 son-in-law.	 I	 want	 to	 marry	 your	 daughter.	 Give	 me
Mehrunissa	and	I	will	make	her	first	among	my	wives	and	first	in	my	heart.’
Ghiyas	Beg’s	eyes	widened.	Instead	of	the	smiles	Salim	had	anticipated,	he	looked	agitated.
‘What	is	it,	Ghiyas	Beg?’
‘Highness,	what	you	ask	is	impossible.’
‘I	don’t	understand	.	.	.	I	thought	you	would	welcome	my	offer.’
‘I	do,	Highness.	It	is	a	great	honour,	an	unimaginable	honour.	But	I	must	repeat	what	I	said.	It	is	out	of
the	question.’
‘Why?’	 Without	 realising	 what	 he	 was	 doing	 Salim	 stepped	 forward	 and	 grabbed	 Ghiyas	 Beg’s	 thin
arm	above	the	elbow.
‘My	daughter	is	already	promised.’
‘To	whom?’
‘To	one	of	your	father’s	commanders	in	Bengal,	Sher	Afghan.	As	a	man	of	honour,	I	cannot	break	off
their	betrothal.	I	am	truly	sorry,	Highness.’

Chapter	26

Oblivion

ighness,	a	letter	has	arrived	for	you	from	Lahore.’
Salim’s	qorchi	handed	him	a	green	leather	pouch	secured	by	a	twist	of	gold	wire	from	which	the
imperial	seal	was	dangling.	Inside,	Salim	found	a	thick	piece	of	paper	folded	into	four	and	opened	it
to	see	Abul	Fazl’s	familiar	handwriting	–	lines	and	lines	of	it.	As	usual,	it	was	only	towards	the	bottom	of
the	page	after	all	the	empty	airy	courtesies	that	Salim	found	the	real	meat	of	what	his	father’s	chronicler
had	to	say:

‘H

His	gracious	Majesty	the	emperor,	in	his	great	and	fathomless	mercy	commands	you	to	return	immediately	to	Lahore	where	he
has	fresh	tasks	he	wishes	you	to	undertake.	He	asks	me	to	say	that	he	hopes	that	from	this	time	forward	your	footsteps	will	return
to	the	path	of	righteousness	and	you	will	become	a	dutiful	son	who	will	never	again	deviate	in	the	manner	that	has	so	distressed
and	disappointed	him.

Salim	handed	the	letter	to	Suleiman	Beg,	who	grinned	broadly	as	he	read	it.	‘I	was	afraid	we	might	be
stuck	here	for	years.’
‘It’s	typical	that	the	style	and	even	the	seals	are	Abul	Fazl’s	and	not	my	father’s.	Nevertheless,	I	didn’t
expect	to	be	recalled	after	only	eight	months.	I’m	surprised.’
‘You	might	look	more	cheerful	about	it.	You’re	not	still	obsessed	with	that	Persian	girl,	are	you?	When
you	get	back	to	your	wives	and	haram	you’ll	realise	she	was	no	more	than	a	passing	fancy	because	you
were	bored.’
Salim	considered.	How	did	he	really	feel?	His	relationship	–	friendship	even	–	with	Ghiyas	Beg	had
made	his	stay	in	Kabul	much	less	irksome	than	it	might	have	been,	and	after	seeing	Mehrunissa	she	had
occupied	his	mind	as	much	as	thoughts	of	returning	to	court.	But	since	Ghiyas	Beg’s	rejection	of	his	offer
of	 marriage	 to	 her	 a	 constraint	 had	 inevitably	 sprung	 up	 between	 them.	 Salim’s	 visits	 to	 the	 Persian’s
house	 had	 grown	 less	 frequent	 and	 of	 course	 he	 had	 not	 seen	 Mehrunissa	 again.	 He	 had,	 however,
discovered	that	she	was	not	due	to	wed	Sher	Afghan	until	the	following	year.	Perhaps	back	in	Lahore	he
could	 persuade	 his	 father	 to	 use	 his	 influence	 with	 Ghiyas	 Beg.	 If	 the	 emperor	 himself	 commanded
Mehrunissa’s	betrothal	to	be	broken	off,	Ghiyas	Beg	as	a	loyal	subject	could	only	obey	.	.	.
The	long	journey	back	down	through	the	passes	from	Kabul,	across	the	Indus	and	the	other	mighty	rivers
of	the	Punjab,	had	gone	swiftly	and	well,	and	unencumbered	by	a	slow	baggage	train	Salim	had	reached
Lahore	in	only	six	weeks.	At	each	passing	mile	his	spirits	had	risen	with	the	heat	of	the	plains	around	him.
However,	as	he	stood	in	Akbar’s	private	apartments,	alone	before	his	father	for	the	first	time	since	his
banishment,	Salim	felt	himself	trembling	with	a	mixture	of	apprehension	and	hope.
‘I	am	glad	to	see	you	safely	returned	from	Kabul.’	Akbar	spoke	first,	his	face	inscrutable.	‘I	regret	that
we	 parted	 in	 anger	 but	 you	 left	 me	 no	 choice	 but	 to	 punish	 you.	 I	 hope	 that	 during	 your	 absence	 you
reflected	on	the	duty	that	a	son	owes	to	his	father	and	that	in	future	you	will	behave	accordingly.’

What	about	the	duty	a	father	owes	to	his	son,	thought	Salim,	but	all	he	said	was,	‘I	know	what	is	due	to
you	and	I	am	grateful	that	you	have	forgiven	me	my	past	errors	and	recalled	me	to	the	court.’
‘Your	errors	were	grave.	I	had	intended	you	to	stay	longer	in	Kabul,	but	your	grandmother	persuaded
me	to	send	for	you.’	Akbar’s	tone	was	still	stiff.
‘Father,	Abul	Fazl’s	letter	mentioned	you	had	further	tasks	for	me.	I	am	eager	to	serve	you	.	.	.	I	.	.	.’
‘In	due	course,’	Akbar	interrupted	him.	‘You	acquitted	yourself	well	in	Kabul	–	Abul	Fazl	tells	me	your
reports	were	thorough	and	Saif	Khan	confirmed	your	good	behaviour	–	but	I	have	not	decided	what	I	wish
you	to	do	next.’
So	Saif	Khan	had	indeed	been	spying	on	him.	Salim	persisted,	‘A	governorship	perhaps,	like	Murad?’
‘There	is	no	need	for	haste.	I	wish	to	see	whether	you	maintain	your	good	conduct,	and	I	will	tell	you
my	decision	about	any	appointment	if	and	when	the	time	comes.’
Salim	tried	not	to	show	his	disappointment	but	knew	it	must	be	written	on	his	face.	He	had	been	hoping
his	return	could	mark	a	new	beginning	in	his	relationship	with	his	father,	but	yet	again	it	seemed	he	would
have	 to	 be	 patient.	 Perhaps	 his	 grandmother	 would	 again	 use	 her	 influence	 on	 his	 behalf	 as	 she	 had	 to
hasten	 his	 return.	 However,	 even	 if	 this	 was	 not	 the	 ideal	 time,	 there	 was	 something	 else	 he	 could	 not
delay	in	asking	Akbar,	and	he	must	ask	in	person.
‘Father,	may	I	request	a	favour?’
‘What	is	it?’	Akbar	looked	genuinely	surprised.
‘I	wish	to	take	a	further	wife.’
‘Who?’	Akbar’s	expression	was	now	one	of	absolute	astonishment.
‘The	 daughter	 of	 Ghiyas	 Beg,	 your	 treasurer	 in	 Kabul,’	 Salim	 said,	 and	 before	 Akbar	 could	 respond
continued,	‘but	there	is	a	difficulty.	She	is	already	promised	to	one	of	your	commanders	in	Bengal,	Sher
Afghan,	 and	 Ghiyas	 Beg	 believes	 it	 would	 be	 dishonourable	 to	 go	 back	 on	 the	 arrangement.	 But	 if	 you
intervened,	Ghiyas	Beg	and	Sher	Afghan	would	have	to	obey	you	and	.	.	.’
‘Enough!	 I	 had	 hoped	 that	 your	 months	 in	 exile	 would	 have	 taught	 you	 some	 sense,	 but	 I	 see	 I	 was
wrong.	It	is	bad	enough	that	you	want	to	marry	a	woman	of	obscure	family	–	an	alliance	that	can	bring	no
possible	benefit	to	our	dynasty	–	but	it	beggars	belief	that	you	can	then	ask	me	to	interfere	in	the	lives	of
my	subjects	to	bring	it	to	pass.’
‘It’s	not	a	passing	whim.	Her	name	is	Mehrunissa.	I	can’t	get	her	from	my	mind.’
‘You	will	have	to.	I	will	not	disrupt	the	marriage	plans	of	Sher	Afghan,	a	loyal,	brave	fighter,	so	you
can	satisfy	your	insatiable	lusts.’
‘It’s	not	lust	.	.	.’
‘Really?	It	seems	to	me	you	have	developed	a	taste	for	other	men’s	women.’	Akbar’s	tone	was	brutal
and	his	reference	to	Anarkali	stung.	Salim	swallowed.	What	could	he	say	in	his	defence	that	Akbar	would
believe?	If	he	compared	his	passion	to	Humayun’s	on	first	seeing	Hamida,	as	he	had	so	often	done	in	his
own	mind,	it	would	only	enrage	his	father.
After	a	moment’s	painful	silence	Akbar	said	wearily,	‘Leave	me.	You	make	me	despair.	I	had	hoped
our	reunion	would	be	happier	but	I	can	see	you	have	not	conquered	your	vices.	You	still	need	to	learn
self-control.	Young	as	he	is,	your	son	Khurram	understands	the	difference	between	right	and	wrong	better
than	you.’
As	Salim	walked	swiftly	from	his	father’s	apartments	tears	of	anger	and	hurt	pricked	his	eyelids.	Akbar
never	 tried	 to	 understand	 him	 and	 seemingly	 never	 would.	 His	 father	 did,	 however,	 choose	 his	 words
carefully	for	their	effect.	Was	his	reference	to	Khurram	a	hint	that	his	own	son	was	better	qualified	to	rule
than	 he	 was?	 Surely	 not	 .	 .	 .	 however	 well	 omened	 his	 birth,	 Khurram	 was	 no	 more	 than	 a	 precocious
child.

Salim	opened	the	painted	wooden	box,	took	out	a	glass	jar	and	held	it	up	to	the	light	with	hands	that	were
not	quite	steady.	Good.	There	were	enough	opium	pellets	to	last	him	until	morning.	Flipping	up	the	jar’s
silver	lid,	Salim	tipped	two	pellets	into	a	goblet	then	poured	in	some	rosewater.	He	smiled	as	he	watched
the	 pellets	 dissolve,	 unleashing	 their	 smoky	 grey	 trail	 until	 only	 a	 few	 stubborn	 granules	 remained.	 He
swirled	the	water	with	his	index	finger	then	raised	the	goblet	to	his	lips.	After	a	few	minutes,	feeling	the
opium	begin	to	do	its	wonderful	work,	he	took	another	few	swallows	of	the	strong	red	wine	he	had	been
drinking	all	day.
That	felt	even	better.	Salim	lay	back	on	a	silk-covered	mattress	by	the	balustrade	enclosing	the	balcony
of	 his	 apartments.	 The	 sounds	 of	 horses’	 hooves	 and	 men’s	 voices	 rising	 from	 the	 courtyard	 below
seemed	to	come	from	farther	and	farther	away	as	he	closed	his	eyes	and	gave	himself	up	to	the	delicious
languor	that	in	recent	weeks	had	become	increasingly	necessary	to	his	well-being.	It	was	an	antidote	both
to	his	father’s	cold	equivocation	whenever	he	asked	about	an	appointment	and	to	his	sons’	discomfort	and
embarrassment	whenever	he	broached	any	topic	other	than	the	most	banal	with	them.	They	had	changed
towards	 him	 while	 he	 had	 been	 away.	 Though	 they	 were	 unfailingly	 polite,	 he	 sensed	 no	 warmth	 or
intimacy.
Neither	his	mother	Hirabai	nor	his	grandmother	Hamida	had	had	anything	constructive	to	offer	either.
His	 mother	 had	 voiced	 only	 contempt	 for	 Akbar	 and	 the	 Moghuls	 in	 general.	 Hamida,	 however
sympathetic	and	loving	her	tone,	had	only	had	kind	words	of	consolation	and	the	advice	to	wait.	She	had
reiterated	how	much	his	affair	with	Anarkali	had	hurt	Akbar	and	how	much	he	detested	the	thought	that	it
would	be	the	subject	of	common	gossip	among	the	people	and	damage	the	image	they	had	of	him	as	allpowerful.	 Consequently	 she	 had	 had	 great	 difficulty	 in	 securing	 Akbar’s	 agreement	 to	 his	 return	 from
banishment	so	she	could	do	no	more	for	the	present.
The	 opium	 and	 the	 wine	 relaxed	 Salim’s	 mind	 and	 body.	 They	 blunted	 painful	 thoughts,	 soothed	 his
aching	 disappointments	 and	 transported	 him	 to	 places	 where	 nothing	 seemed	 to	 matter	 much.	 He	 felt	 a
small	insect	crawl	over	his	naked	chest	but	the	effort	it	would	require	to	crush	it	seemed	too	great.	Live,
little	creature,	whatever	you	are,	he	thought	and	laughed	softly.	He	readjusted	his	position.	The	soft,	warm
silk	of	the	mattress	felt	wonderful	–	like	the	skin	of	a	woman.	Perhaps	later	he	would	go	to	the	haram	and
make	love	to	Man	Bai	or	Jodh	Bai,	though	that	also	seemed	too	much	effort,	particularly	since	they	too
had	scarcely	seemed	wholehearted	in	their	welcome	to	him.	In	fact,	when	he	thought	about	it	he	realised
he	hadn’t	seen	any	of	his	wives	or	indeed	his	sons	for	days.	But	why	should	he	when	he	was	so	content
just	lying	here?	For	a	second,	Mehrunissa’s	striking	face	was	before	him.	But	Suleiman	Beg	was	probably
right.	She	was	just	another	woman	.	.	.
Still,	it	would	be	nice	to	have	some	company	here,	someone	to	share	the	shadowy,	delightful	twilight
that	was	enveloping	him.	Suleiman	Beg	stubbornly	refused	his	every	invitation	to	join	him.	Even	at	the
start	 when	 he’d	 begun	 experimenting	 with	 just	 a	 pellet	 or	 two,	 his	 milk-brother	 would	 not	 be	 tempted.
Indeed,	 he’d	 even	 shown	 his	 disapproval	 .	 .	 .	 Perhaps	 he	 should	 invite	 his	 half-brothers	 Daniyal	 and
Murad?	Murad	had	returned	to	Lahore	a	month	ago,	recalled	by	Akbar	from	his	governorship	for	having
had	the	envoy	of	an	important	vassal	flogged	for	showing	disrespect.
Murad	had	probably	done	nothing	wrong,	Salim	mused,	despite	the	stories	that	he	had	been	drunk	when
he	 ordered	 the	 flogging.	 It	 was	 just	 that	 their	 father	 was	 impossible	 to	 please	 where	 his	 sons	 were
concerned.	Even	had	they	been	perfection	in	every	way	they	would	never	have	been	able	to	live	up	to	his
expectations,	his	standards	and	his	overwhelming	confidence,	bolstered	by	his	years	of	unbroken	success,
that	there	was	only	one	way	to	do	things	–	his.	It	was	typical	that	instead	of	sending	himself	or	Daniyal	to
replace	Murad	as	governor,	Akbar	had	appointed	a	nephew	of	the	toadying	Abul	Fazl.	A	second	insect	–

it	felt	a	little	larger	this	time	–	was	running	up	Salim’s	arm.	This	time	he	didn’t	grudge	the	exertion	but
crushed	 it,	 feeling	 liquid	 ooze	 from	 its	 scaly	 body.	 Pity	 it	 wasn’t	 Abul	 Fazl,	 he	 thought.	 How	 much	 fat
could	 be	 squeezed	 from	 his	 corpulent	 frame?	 Then	 he	 closed	 his	 eyes	 and	 let	 his	 mind	 drift	 blissfully
away.
Waking	with	a	start,	Salim	saw	that	the	sky	above	was	dark	and	pricked	with	stars	that	seemed	to	be
spiralling	across	the	heavens.	His	head	was	throbbing	and	his	mouth	was	so	dry	his	tongue	was	sticking	to
his	palate.	Putting	one	hand	on	the	stone	balustrade,	Salim	hauled	himself	slowly	to	his	feet.	His	legs,	in
fact	his	whole	body,	were	trembling.	He	couldn’t	be	cold.	It	was	May,	just	before	the	monsoon	rains	–	the
hottest	time	of	the	year.	This	had	happened	to	him	before	but	he	knew	how	to	remedy	it.	Clearly	he’d	not
taken	enough	opium.	Dropping	to	his	knees	he	crawled	across	the	shadowy	balcony,	which	was	lit	only	by
a	single	oil	lamp,	groping	for	the	wooden	box.	Where	was	it?	Panic	surged	through	him.	What	would	he
do	if	he	couldn’t	find	it?	He	must	have	some	more	opium	quickly.	Then	he	remembered	he	had	attendants	.
.	 .	 tens	 of	 them.	 One	 shout	 would	 bring	 them	 running	 to	 his	 assistance	 from	 the	 corridor	 outside	 his
apartments	where	he	had	ordered	them	to	remain.	But	it	was	all	right	.	.	.	here	was	the	box.
Reaching	inside	he	found	the	jar,	tipped	the	remaining	pellets	into	his	mouth	and	tried	to	swallow	them
but	they	stuck	in	his	dry	gullet	–	he’d	forgotten	to	dissolve	them.	He	felt	himself	choking	and	tried	to	spit
the	pellets	out	again,	but	they	were	too	firmly	lodged.	Fighting	for	breath	and	peering	desperately	into	the
darkness	he	set	out	on	hands	and	knees	once	more,	trying	to	find	the	ewer	of	rosewater	or	the	bottle	of
wine	or	even	one	of	the	brass	bowls	of	marigold	petals	that	stood	on	the	balcony	–	anything	with	liquid	in
it.	Just	when	he	thought	he	was	about	to	black	out	he	felt	the	cold	metal	of	the	ewer.	In	his	haste	to	grab	it,
he	knocked	it	over.	Bending	forward	he	greedily	lapped	the	water	from	the	floor	and	at	last	managed	to
swallow	 the	 pellets	 down.	 He	 could	 hear	 a	 harsh,	 ragged	 rasping	 and	 it	 was	 some	 moments	 before	 he
realised	it	was	his	own	breathing.
Crawling	 slowly	 back	 towards	 the	 mattress,	 he	 lay	 down	 again,	 arms	 folded	 across	 his	 chest,	 hands
tucked	beneath	his	armpits,	anything	to	try	to	get	warm.	But	it	was	no	good,	he	couldn’t	stop	shivering.
Then	he	realised	what	it	was	–	it	wasn’t	cold	but	fear.	The	darkness	was	filled	with	strange	and	terrible
creatures.	He	could	see	them	whirling	around	him	trying	to	get	close,	to	stupefy	him	with	their	fetid	breath
and	steal	him	away	to	the	dank,	earthy	graves	they	inhabited.	He	must	get	away	before	it	was	too	late	.	.	.
Somehow	he	managed	to	drag	himself	to	his	knees	but	then	everything	went	black	.	.	.
‘Salim	 .	 .	 .	 Salim	 .	 .	 .’	 Someone	 was	 wiping	 his	 face	 with	 a	 cool	 damp	 cloth	 but	 he	 twisted	 away.
Suppose	it	was	one	of	those	creatures?	‘Stop	fighting.	It’s	me,	Suleiman	Beg	.	.	.’	Salim	felt	a	strong	hand
holding	him	down	as	the	wiping	resumed.	Forcing	his	eyes	open,	he	groaned	as	agonisingly	bright	sunlight
hit	them	and	clenched	the	lids	shut	again.
‘Drink	this,	now!’	Someone	was	none	too	gently	forcing	his	mouth	open	and	he	felt	the	rim	of	something
metal	against	his	lower	lip.	Then	his	head	was	being	tipped	back	and	water	was	gushing	down	his	throat.
He	felt	he	was	drowning,	but	there	was	no	mercy	till	at	last	he	heard	the	clang	of	the	metal	cup	as	it	was
flung	to	the	floor	and	rolled	away.
Opening	his	eyes	again,	this	time	Salim	managed	to	keep	them	open	and	found	himself	staring	up	into
Suleiman	Beg’s	face.	He	had	never	seen	his	milk-brother	so	concerned	or	so	strained.	Salim	sat	up	and
tried	to	speak	but	couldn’t	harness	his	body	to	do	what	he	wanted.	His	lips	wouldn’t	move.	He	tried	again
and	 this	 time	 managed	 a	 little	 better,	 getting	 as	 far	 as	 ‘I	 feel’	 before,	 suddenly	 and	 violently,	 a	 bitter,
viscous	fluid	shot	from	his	mouth.	Ashamed,	he	turned	aside	from	his	friend	and	continued	to	retch	on	the
floor	until	at	last	there	was	nothing	left	and	his	ribs	felt	as	if	he’d	cracked	them.	‘I’m	sorry	.	.	.’
‘What	are	you	apologising	for?	Being	sick	or	the	fact	that	you	nearly	killed	yourself?’
‘What	.	.	.	what	.	.	.	do	you	mean?	All	I	did	was	take	opium	.	.	.’

‘How	much?’
‘I	don’t	know	.	.	.’
‘And	wine	as	well?’
Salim	nodded.	Putting	a	hand	to	his	right	temple,	he	found	it	sticky	with	congealed	blood.
‘You	 struck	 your	 head	 on	 the	 stone	 balustrade.	 Look,	 there’s	 blood	 on	 it	 where	 you	 must	 have	 fallen
against	it,’	said	Suleiman	Beg,	pointing	at	the	red-brown	smears.
Salim	 slowly	 shook	 his	 throbbing	 head.	 ‘I	 don’t	 remember	 anything	 about	 that	 .	 .	 .	 All	 I	 recall	 is
wanting	more	opium	and	not	being	able	to	find	it	.	.	.	then	I	was	choking	.	.	.’
‘Your	 qorchi	 heard	 a	 crash.	 You’d	 forbidden	 him	 to	 enter	 your	 apartments	 so	 he	 came	 to	 find	 me.	 I
found	you	sprawled	on	the	balcony,	shivering	and	shaking	and	bleeding	.	.	.	I	covered	you	with	blankets
and	staunched	your	wound.	Salim,	you	were	lucky	.	.	.’
He	stared	at	Suleiman	Beg,	trying	to	take	in	what	he	was	saying,	but	he	was	starting	to	feel	sick	again.
‘I’ve	been	trying	to	warn	you	for	weeks.	Isn’t	it	enough	to	see	the	state	your	half-brothers	are	in?	But
you’ve	descended	faster,	lower	and	more	determinedly	than	even	they’ve	managed.	You	act	irrationally.
You	 lose	 your	 temper	 suddenly	 and	 violently.	 I	 heard	 you	 shouting	 at	 Khusrau	 a	 few	 days	 ago	 for	 no
reason	 at	 all	 and	 saw	 how	 he	 looked	 at	 you.	 You’re	 alienating	 everyone	 around	 you.’	 Suleiman	 Beg
sounded	really	angry.
Salim	remained	silent,	still	fighting	down	the	bile	that	was	threatening	to	rise	in	his	throat.
‘Why,	Salim?	Why	do	you	do	it?’
‘Isn’t	the	question	why	not?’	Salim	replied	at	last.	‘At	least	opium	and	wine	make	me	happy.	I	made	a
mistake	about	the	quantity	last	night,	that’s	all.	In	future	I’ll	be	more	careful.’
‘You	haven’t	answered	my	question.	Why	are	you	setting	out	to	ruin	yourself?’
‘My	father	has	no	regard	for	me.	My	life	has	no	purpose.	Murad	and	Daniyal	have	the	right	idea.	Why
not	enjoy	myself	and	forget	the	rest?’
‘What	do	you	mean	by	“the	rest”?	Your	health,	your	sons,	the	future	of	your	dynasty	that	used	to	matter
so	much	to	you?	It’s	the	wine	and	the	opium	speaking,	not	you.	Have	the	strength	and	courage	to	give	them
up	and	then	see	how	you	feel.’
Salim	scrutinised	Suleiman	Beg’s	flushed,	earnest	face.	‘I	disappoint	you,	I	know.	Just	as	I	disappoint
my	father.	I’m	sorry.’
‘Don’t	be	sorry	–	do	something	about	it.	It’s	a	good	thing	your	father’s	been	away	on	an	inspection	of
Delhi	and	Agra	and	hasn’t	seen	you	in	this	state	.	.	.	You’ve	got	four	weeks	before	he	returns	to	Lahore.
Use	that	time	to	cure	yourself.	You	say	your	father	despises	you	–	well,	don’t	give	him	reason	to.’
‘You’re	a	good	friend,	Suleiman	Beg	.	.	.	I	know	you	mean	well	but	you	don’t	understand	how	hard	it	is.
My	youth’s	passing	–	my	energies	and	talents	are	being	wasted	.	.	.’
‘Don’t	lose	faith.	You’ve	told	me	so	often	what	Shaikh	Salim	Chishti	said	to	you	.	.	.	that	you	wouldn’t
have	an	easy	life	.	.	.	that	he	didn’t	envy	you	.	.	.	but	that	one	day	everything	you	wanted	would	be	yours.
You	should	remember	that.	The	Sufi	was	a	wise	man	and	your	behaviour	shames	his	memory.’
Salim	could	find	no	answer	to	what	his	milk-brother	had	said.	‘And	you	shame	me,	Suleiman	Beg,’	he
replied	at	last.	‘You	are	right.	I	mustn’t	let	self-pity	destroy	me.	I	will	try	to	give	up	opium	and	drink,	at
least	for	a	while,	but	I	will	need	your	help	.	.	.’
‘Of	course.	The	first	thing	is	to	consult	a	hakim.	I	have	already	summoned	one	–	a	discreet	man	who	is
waiting	outside.’
‘You	were	very	sure	you	could	convince	me	.	.	.’
‘No,	but	I	hoped	I	could.’
Half	 an	 hour	 later	 the	 hakim	 had	 finished	 pulling	 back	 Salim’s	 eyelids,	 checking	 the	 colour	 of	 his

tongue	and	scraping	it	with	a	thin	metal	spatula,	taking	his	pulse	and	running	his	hands	over	his	body	and
back.	During	the	examination	he	had	said	little	but	had	looked	increasingly	concerned.
‘Highness,’	he	said,	closing	up	the	leather	bag	in	which	he	carried	his	instruments,	‘I	won’t	hide	the
truth	from	you.	You	tell	me	that	last	night	you	took	a	very	large	amount	of	opium.	I	can	see	that	from	your
dilated	eyes.	But	I	can	also	tell	that	you	drink	to	excess.	You	must	give	up	both	strong	drink	and	opium,
Highness,	or	you	will	become	very	ill.	You	might	even	die.	Even	now	your	hands	are	shaking.’
‘No!’	Salim	held	them	out	in	front	of	him.	He	would	show	the	hakim.	But	the	doctor	was	right.	They
were	trembling,	his	right	hand	worse	than	the	left.	However	hard	he	tried,	he	couldn’t	control	the	tremors.
‘Don’t	despair,	Highness.	We	are	in	time	and	you	are	young	and	strong.	But	you	must	do	exactly	as	I
say.	Will	you	put	yourself	in	my	hands?’
‘How	long	will	it	take?’
‘That	depends	on	you,	Highness.’
Salim	 and	 Suleiman	 Beg	 were	 galloping	 along	 the	 banks	 of	 the	 Ravi	 beneath	 a	 pale	 November	 sun.
Behind	rode	Salim’s	huntsmen,	every	man	looking	cheerful	at	the	prospect	of	a	good	day’s	sport	ahead.
Suddenly	 a	 snipe	 flew	 out	 of	 the	 tall	 brown	 rushes.	 Salim	 rose	 in	 his	 stirrups	 and	 almost	 in	 a	 single
movement	reached	for	an	arrow,	fitted	it	to	his	double	bow	and	fired.	His	hands	were	steady	now	and	the
snipe	fell	from	the	sky,	wings	fluttering	futilely.	It	was	six	months	since	the	night	he	had	collapsed	–	six
difficult	months,	particularly	at	first	when	his	resolution	had	often	faltered	and	he	had	returned	to	the	twin
consolations	 of	 opium	 and	 wine.	 However,	 he	 had	 struggled	 hard.	 Even	 now	 he	 occasionally	 lapsed,
usually	when	his	father	had	been	particularly	arrogant	or	dismissive	.	.	.	But	as	he	replaced	his	bow	Salim
vowed	 he	 would	 be	 strong,	 whatever	 the	 future	 held,	 whatever	 disappointments	 and	 setbacks	 he	 might
suffer.

Part	VI
Seizer	of	the	World

Chapter	27

A	Jute	Sack

now	 know	 my	 father	 will	 never	 give	 me	 any	 post	 of	 real	 responsibility	 even	 though,	 like	 my
grandfather	and	my	great-grandfather	before	him,	he	was	emperor	when	he	was	half	my	age.’	Pulling
the	ornamental	dagger	that	hung	at	his	waist	from	its	scabbard,	Salim	stabbed	at	the	pink	silk	brocade
cover	of	the	divan	on	which	he	was	lounging	in	the	late	afternoon	heat	in	the	fortress-palace	at	Lahore.
The	blade	had	been	blunted,	but	even	so	the	dagger	cut	through	the	delicate	cloth	and	penetrated	the	cotton
padding.	‘I’ve	waited	and	waited	and	to	what	point?	Absolutely	none!	No	command,	no	governorship,	no
prospect	of	anything.	Rarely	even	a	kind	word.	What	am	I	to	do?’	he	demanded	of	Suleiman	Beg,	who
was	lying	propped	on	one	arm	on	an	adjacent	couch,	a	glass	of	mango	juice	in	his	other	hand.	‘I’m	not
sure,’	said	Suleiman	Beg	thoughtfully.	Then,	taking	another	sip	of	juice,	he	continued,	‘But	in	matters	of
succession	I’ve	often	heard	it	said	that	time	and	patience	are	the	key.’
‘Although	he’s	in	his	late	fifties,	my	father’s	health	has	never	been	better	if	that’s	what	you	mean.	I’m
not	even	sure	he’s	mortal	–	the	way	he	guards	his	power	and	gives	no	thought	to	his	successor	makes	me
think	he	at	least	does	not	recognise	his	mortality.	Age	just	seems	to	confirm	him	in	his	belief	that	he	alone
knows	best.’	Salim	struck	at	the	divan	again,	this	time	more	violently,	raising	dust	as	he	did	so.
‘But	if	there	is	no	immediate	prospect	of	your	father	taking	his	place	in	Paradise,	you	cannot	say	the
same	 of	 your	 half-brothers	 –	 your	 rivals	 for	 the	 succession.	 They’ve	 both	 given	 in	 entirely	 to	 alcohol,
haven’t	they?	If	they	continue	to	behave	as	they	do,	they	cannot	be	long	for	the	world,	even	if	they	have	the
constitutions	of	oxen.’
Salim	smiled	to	himself	as	he	recalled	Daniyal’s	and	Murad’s	behaviour	ten	days	before.	Akbar	had
summoned	 all	 three	 of	 his	 sons	 without	 prior	 warning	 to	 the	 vast	 dusty	 parade	 ground	 in	 front	 of	 the
palace	just	after	dawn,	while	the	white	mist	still	cloaked	the	Ravi	river	and	only	the	earliest	of	Lahore’s
cocks	had	roused	themselves	to	crow.	Luckily	the	previous	evening	had	been	one	of	those	during	which
Salim	had	steeled	himself	to	follow	the	hakim’s	advice	to	avoid	the	lure	of	opium	and	alcohol.	Instead	he
had	gone	to	the	haram.	Though	his	longing	for	Mehrunissa	had	never	left	him,	he	had	determinedly	pushed
her	 from	 his	 mind.	 For	 the	 first	 time	 for	 some	 while	 he	 had	 spent	 the	 night	 with	 Jodh	 Bai.	 She	 had
teasingly	 complimented	 him	 on	 his	 renewed	 virility	 as	 they	 lay	 together,	 naked	 and	 sweat-soaked,	 after
their	 second	 bout	 of	 love-making.	 Salim	 had	 had	 to	 admit	 to	 himself	 that	 abstinence	 from	 alcohol	 and
opium	increased	his	sexual	appetites.	Pondering	the	point	had	rekindled	his	vigour,	leading	him	to	make
love	to	Jodh	Bai	for	a	third	time.	Therefore	he	had	been	relaxed	and	sober,	if	tired	and	bleary-eyed,	when
he	emerged	on	to	the	parade	ground	to	answer	his	father’s	dawn	summons.
As	 soon	 as	 they	 had	 appeared,	 it	 had	 been	 obvious	 that	 neither	 Murad	 nor	 Daniyal	 had	 been	 as
abstemious	as	he	had	the	previous	evening.	As	Murad	had	come	through	the	tall	stone	gateway	on	to	the
parade	ground,	one	of	his	attendants	had	still	been	attempting	to	tie	his	sash.	Murad,	square	jaw	jutting,
had	 brushed	 him	 aside,	 swearing	 for	 all	 to	 hear	 that	 he	 had	 no	 need	 of	 such	 fussing	 attentions	 while
roughly	knotting	the	sash	himself.	When	Daniyal	had	entered,	he	had	done	so	with	the	slow,	exaggeratedly
steady	gait	of	the	drunk	trying	to	suggest	he	was	anything	but.	He	had	kept	his	head	unnaturally	still	and	his

‘I

bloodshot	eyes	fixed	firmly	in	front	of	him	as	he	approached	his	father,	but	he	had	still	stumbled	as	he
took	the	last	few	steps	and	tried	to	bend	into	the	required	low	bow.
Akbar	had	then	ordered	all	three	of	his	sons	to	mount	their	horses,	held	ready	by	waiting	grooms,	and
lead	some	of	their	bodyguards	in	attempting	to	spear	watermelons	from	the	saddle	with	their	lances.	As	he
tried	 to	 mount,	 Murad’s	 badly	 tied	 sash	 had	 come	 loose	 and	 he	 had	 stumbled	 over	 the	 trailing	 cloth,
entirely	unable	to	prevent	himself	sprawling	face	down	in	the	dust.	When	he	had	been	helped	up	and	on	to
his	mount	and	had	eventually	set	it	into	motion,	he	had	galloped	only	a	hundred	yards	before	slipping	once
more	from	the	saddle	on	to	the	ground.
Daniyal	 had	 done	 rather	 better,	 succeeding	 in	 mounting	 and	 getting	 his	 horse	 to	 gallop	 without
difficulty.	But	then,	as	he	attempted	to	bend	to	spear	the	melon,	he	too	had	fallen.	Staggering	to	his	feet,	he
had	vomited	copiously	through	the	gloved	hand	with	which	he	had	tried	to	stem	the	noisome	stream.
Salim	meanwhile	had	succeeded	in	spearing	the	watermelon.	His	father’s	response	had	been	not	praise
but	to	say,	‘I	see	that	you	for	once	have	not	been	drinking,	Salim.	Remember	this	will	not	be	the	last	time	I
will	 put	 you	 through	 such	 a	 test.	 You	 are	 dismissed.’	 As	 Salim	 left	 the	 parade	 ground	 he	 had	 heard	 his
father	 order	 his	 half-brothers	 back	 to	 their	 quarters	 and	 then	 command	 some	 of	 his	 most	 trusted
bodyguards	 to	 make	 sure	 that	 the	 two	 did	 not	 leave	 their	 rooms	 for	 fourteen	 days	 and	 that	 no	 one	 took
alcohol	in	to	them.	At	the	end	of	that	time	they	were	to	be	kept	under	close	observation	to	ensure	that	they
remained	abstemious.
‘Surely	 when	 their	 spell	 in	 confinement	 ends	 in	 a	 few	 days,	 they’ll	 have	 sobered	 up,	 won’t	 they,
Suleiman	Beg?’
‘I	 doubt	 it.	 I’ve	 heard	 that	 some	 of	 their	 companions	 have	 managed	 to	 smuggle	 liquor	 in	 to	 them.
Rumour	has	it	Murad’s	fat	steward	wound	some	cow’s	intestines	filled	with	spirits	around	him	beneath
his	voluminous	garments	to	do	it,	and	that	Daniyal	bribed	one	of	the	guards	to	bring	him	the	stuff	in	the
blocked-off	barrel	of	his	musket.’
‘The	 latter	 can’t	 be	 true.	 My	 father	 would	 have	 a	 guard	 executed	 under	 the	 elephant’s	 foot	 for	 such
blatant	disobedience.’
‘It’s	surprising	what	risks	men	will	take	for	money,	but	perhaps	it’s	only	a	story.	All	I	can	say	is	that
everyone	is	gossiping	about	it.’
‘Maybe	you’re	right	and	they’ve	not	real	rivals	as	my	father’s	heir,	but	that	does	not	mean	I	have	any
prospect	of	achieving	the	power	that	is	my	due	at	this	stage	in	my	life.	There	is	much	that	I	could	achieve
for	our	dynasty	if	only	my	father	would	give	me	a	chance.’
‘Like	what?’
‘Well,	ridding	him	of	some	of	his	fawning	and	corrupt	advisers	–	Abul	Fazl	for	a	start.’
‘But	you	know	your	father	wouldn’t	countenance	their	dismissal.	At	the	very	least,	you	would	have	had
to	prove	yourself	as	a	good	governor	somewhere	before	criticising	his	own	advisers	and	administration.’
‘How	can	I	do	that	when	my	father	will	give	me	no	position	of	trust?’	Salim	thudded	his	dagger	into	the
divan	once	more,	eyes	blazing.	‘Sometimes	I	think	I	have	no	alternative	but	to	take	over	the	government	of
a	province	without	my	father’s	permission	to	demonstrate	my	worth!’
‘But	that	would	be	rebellion.’
‘Call	it	what	you	will	–	I	might	say	I	was	using	my	initiative.’
‘You	are	serious,	aren’t	you?’	said	Suleiman	Beg	quietly.
‘Yes,’	said	Salim,	looking	directly	at	his	friend.	‘It’s	something	I’ve	been	thinking	about	for	months	in
the	dark	hours	of	the	night	as	I’ve	fought	to	curb	my	own	craving	for	drink.	Don’t	look	so	shocked	–	I	have
many	friends	among	the	young	middle-ranking	commanders	in	our	armies	in	the	east.	They	too	resent	the
dead	hands	of	their	older	superiors	on	their	shoulders	–	they	too	want	power	and	responsibility.’

‘It’s	 true.	 I	 have	 heard	 such	 mutterings	 of	 discontent,’	 said	 Suleiman	 Beg.	 ‘There	 would	 also	 be	 the
inducements	of	promotion	and	reward	.	.	.’
‘I	see	that	you	are	beginning	to	believe	that	it	might	be	possible.	Would	you	be	prepared	to	join	me?’
‘You	should	know	I	would.	We	have	shared	so	much.	I	owe	my	loyalty	to	you	before	any	other.’	Then
after	some	moments’	reflection,	now	looking	as	serious	and	intent	as	Salim,	Suleiman	Beg	added,	‘What’s
more	you	might	well	succeed	in	winning	your	father’s	attention	and	respect.	If	you	act,	what	will	your	first
steps	be?’
‘To	sound	out	some	of	those	young	officers	in	the	eastern	army.	I	cannot	travel	there	without	my	father’s
sanction,	but	you	could	.	.	.’
‘I	will	go	–	I	still	have	some	relations	in	the	administration	in	Bengal	and	no	one	will	suspect	if	I	visit
them.’
‘Thank	 you	 for	 your	 trust	 and	 loyalty.’	 Much	 to	 his	 surprise,	 as	 he	 spoke	 Salim	 heard	 a	 new-found
authority	in	his	tone	–	not	unlike	his	father’s.	Now	he	had	determined	on	action,	at	least	the	uncertainty	of
waiting	would	be	ended.	Whatever	the	outcome	he	would	never	need	to	reproach	himself	with	a	lack	of
the	courage	to	act.
As	Salim	looked	out	three	months	later	from	beneath	the	awning	of	his	large	tent	at	the	centre	of	his	camp,
the	sun	was	setting	over	the	Chambal	river.	Flocks	of	waterfowl	–	dark	silhouettes	against	the	pale	orange
sunset	 –	 were	 swooping	 down	 to	 roost	 among	 the	 reeds	 and	 rushes	 fringing	 the	 riverbank.	 Under	 the
pretext	of	an	extended	tiger	hunting	expedition	he	had	left	his	father’s	court	six	weeks	previously.	For	the
last	few	days	he	had	been	anxiously	scanning	the	landscape	for	approaching	groups	of	horsemen,	hoping
for	the	return	of	Suleiman	Beg	from	his	clandestine	mission	to	the	east	but	a	part	of	him	fearing	that	any
riders	who	appeared	might	be	Abul	Fazl’s	men	coming	to	arrest	him	having	discovered	his	plotting.
Just	 after	 noon	 that	 day,	 a	 group	 of	 horsemen	 had	 appeared.	 As	 they	 drew	 closer,	 emerging	 from	 the
shimmering	heat	haze,	he	had	seen	there	were	too	few	to	be	an	arresting	party.	To	Salim’s	great	relief,	it
had	 been	 Suleiman	 Beg.	 However,	 he	 had	 been	 so	 exhausted	 by	 long	 days	 in	 the	 saddle	 that	 after
reassuring	Salim	in	the	broadest	terms	of	his	mission’s	success	he	had	requested	permission	to	sleep.	The
two	had	agreed	to	discuss	the	results	in	more	detail	as	they	ate	together	that	night.	Behind	him	in	the	tent
Salim	could	hear	his	attendants	beginning	to	make	preparations	for	the	meal.
Shading	his	eyes	against	the	setting	sun,	he	saw	Suleiman	Beg	making	his	way	towards	him	and	stepped
forward	 to	 greet	 him.	 The	 two	 men	 embraced	 and	 then,	 arms	 round	 each	 other’s	 shoulders,	 ducked
beneath	the	tent’s	fringed	green	awning	and	entered.
Here,	a	low	table	surrounded	by	silk-covered	bolsters	and	cushions	was	spread	with	an	array	of	foods
–	chicken	and	lamb	cooked	in	the	tandoor,	stew	made	in	the	Kashmiri	way	with	dried	fruits,	mild	spices
and	yoghourt	stirred	into	the	sauce,	hotter	vegetable	dishes	made	according	to	Gujarati	recipes	and	fish
from	the	Chambal.	As	they	began	to	eat,	dipping	into	the	stews	with	pieces	of	nan	bread,	Salim	dismissed
the	servants	and	spoke.
‘Tell	me	about	your	discussions.	How	many	officers	can	we	count	on	in	the	eastern	provinces?’
‘Perhaps	two	hundred.	Each	new	recruit	suggested	others	who	might	be	sympathetic	to	our	cause.	They
are	mostly	as	we	expected	–	young	men	like	ourselves,	eager	for	responsibility	as	well	as	for	the	rewards
I	 promised	 them	 on	 your	 behalf.	 But	 there	 are	 also	 some	 older	 ones	 disappointed	 by	 their	 lack	 of
advancement	 or	 critical	 of	 the	 tolerance	 your	 father	 shows	 towards	 former	 enemies	 and	 those	 of	 other
religions.’
‘How	many	men	do	they	command	in	total?’

‘Around	thirty	thousand.’
‘That	 should	 be	 enough	 to	 demonstrate	 to	 my	 father	 that	 I	 must	 be	 taken	 seriously	 and	 given	 more
power.’
‘Many	 were	 convinced	 to	 join	 us	 because	 this	 is	 your	 motivation,	 not	 full-scale	 rebellion	 and	 the
usurpation	of	your	father’s	throne.	It	reassured	them	that	at	some	stage	you	would	negotiate.’
‘Then	they	must	continue	to	believe	so.’
‘What	do	you	mean?	That	is	your	intention,	isn’t	it?’
‘Yes	.	.	.	yes,	I	suppose	it	is.	Although	sometimes	I	indulge	myself	by	thinking	that	if	all	went	very	well
I	might	force	my	father’s	abdication	now	rather	than	wait	for	his	death.’
‘Guard	 against	 such	 thoughts.	 Your	 father’s	 forces	 are	 powerful.	 We	 will	 have	 enough	 men	 to	 show
your	mettle	and	your	worthiness	for	a	greater	role	in	government	affairs,	but	never	enough	to	succeed	in	a
full	revolt.	If	you	tried	to	do	so,	some	of	our	existing	supporters	would	fall	away.’
‘My	father	is	loved	by	the	people,	I	know.	It	sometimes	seems	to	me	that	he	understands	them	better	and
cares	more	about	their	happiness	than	he	does	for	many	of	those	closer	to	him.	I	will	doubtless	negotiate.	I
was	only	suggesting	we	should	not	rule	anything	out	while	we	see	how	the	situation	develops.’
‘When	should	we	take	the	next	step?	We	shouldn’t	wait	long.	Abul	Fazl’s	spies	are	everywhere.	He	has
subtle	ways	of	coaxing	secrets	from	men	and	changing	their	loyalties.’
‘Allow	me	to	worry	about	Abul	Fazl.	He	is	only	human,	after	all.	But	we	won’t	delay.	I’ve	already	sent
messages	to	people	I	know	to	be	loyal	to	me	in	Agra	and	Lahore	to	join	me	here	within	a	month.	When
you’re	rested	and	we’ve	discussed	our	plans	in	more	detail	you	should	return	east	and	collect	our	forces
there.	Once	I	have	assembled	my	own	men,	I’ll	ride	with	them	to	meet	you	at	Allahabad.	Its	position	at	the
junction	of	the	Jumna	and	the	Ganges	will	mean	my	father	will	be	unable	to	ignore	us	if	we	make	that	our
base.’
Salim	held	up	his	hand	to	halt	his	column.	The	messenger	he	had	sent	to	Nasser	Hamid,	commander	of	the
garrison	 of	 Allahabad,	 now	 only	 four	 miles	 away,	 its	 domes	 and	 towers	 clearly	 visible,	 was	 galloping
back	towards	them.	As	the	young	man	reined	in	there	was	a	broad	smile	on	his	face.	‘Highness,	Nasser
Hamid	has	thrown	open	the	town	to	you.	He	bids	you	welcome.’
Salim’s	 shoulders	 dropped	 and	 he	 began	 to	 relax	 for	 the	 first	 time	 in	 weeks.	 Nasser	 Hamid	 was	 a
friend	 from	 his	 youth	 and	 in	 secret	 correspondence	 had	 promised	 to	 yield	 Allahabad	 to	 Salim.
Nevertheless,	 as	 he	 had	 ridden	 towards	 the	 city	 that	 morning,	 Salim	 had	 felt	 apprehensive.	 Everything
seemed	to	be	going	almost	too	well.	Since	parting	from	Suleiman	Beg	he	had	succeeded	in	winning	young
officers	from	both	Lahore	and	Agra	to	his	cause.	Just	seven	weeks	ago,	scarcely	pausing	in	a	conversation
with	Abul	Fazl,	Akbar	had	nodded	his	assent	to	his	eldest	son’s	request	to	leave	the	court	and	Lahore	on
another	hunting	expedition.	The	next	day	Salim	had	ridden	out	with	a	band	of	his	followers	on	his	mission
to	demand	his	father’s	attention	and	to	prove	his	worth,	as	he	put	it	to	himself,	although	he	knew	others
would	simply	call	it	rebellion.
As	 he	 rode	 he	 wondered	 whether	 and	 in	 what	 circumstances	 he	 would	 see	 Akbar	 again.	 Of	 more
concern	than	the	impact	of	his	action	on	his	father	had	been	the	fact	that	he	could	bring	neither	his	wives
nor	 his	 children	 with	 him.	 He	 felt	 far	 from	 close	 enough	 to	 any	 of	 his	 wives	 to	 take	 them	 into	 his
confidence	–	besides,	the	haram	was	notorious	for	its	loose	talk.	His	young	sons	spent	so	much	of	their
time	 with	 their	 grandfather	 that	 their	 departure	 with	 him	 would	 be	 too	 unusual	 to	 pass	 without	 notice.
Perhaps	his	greatest	sorrow,	though,	was	that	he	had	been	unable	to	say	anything	to	his	grandmother	who
had	 worked	 so	 hard	 for	 his	 recall	 from	 Kabul.	 He	 knew	 how	 much	 it	 would	 hurt	 her	 that	 he	 was

challenging	his	father	and	in	such	a	way.	She	loved	them	both	and	would	fear	for	them	both,	dreading	their
confrontation	 turning	 into	 all-out	 war.	 At	 present,	 however,	 there	 was	 no	 sign	 of	 that.	 His	 scouts	 had
reported	 no	 traces	 of	 pursuit,	 and	 when	 a	 division	 of	 his	 father’s	 horsemen	 on	 a	 routine	 patrol	 had
approached,	both	their	commander	and	Salim	had	sheered	away,	making	sure	they	gave	each	other	a	wide
berth.	As	he	had	ridden	day	after	day	with	his	growing	army,	Salim	had	begun	to	enjoy	command	and	the
freedom	he	felt	from	interference	by	his	father	or	anyone	else.	He	knew	this	would	not	last	for	ever	and	he
would	need	all	his	abilities	to	secure	the	best	outcome	for	himself	and	also,	he	reminded	himself,	for	the
dynasty.
Suleiman	Beg	had	sent	messengers	that	he	and	the	contingent	from	Bengal	would	reach	Allahabad	in	a
fortnight.	He	would	be	glad	to	see	his	milk-brother,	not	just	for	the	strong	body	of	men	he	was	bringing	but
also	for	his	friendship,	his	calm,	considered	advice	and	his	absolute	loyalty.	But	for	the	moment	he	must
ensure	he	made	a	good	entrance	into	Allahabad	to	impress	its	citizens	and	to	reinforce	the	confidence	of
his	own	men.
‘Unfurl	our	banners,’	he	commanded,	sitting	straighter	in	the	saddle.	‘Order	the	mounted	trumpeters	to
the	 front	 together	 with	 the	 elephants	 carrying	 the	 kettledrums	 and	 their	 drummers.	 Have	 our	 men	 close
ranks,	then	sound	the	trumpets,	beat	the	drums,	and	let	us	advance	into	Allahabad.’
‘Highness,	an	envoy	has	arrived	from	Bir	Singh,	the	Bundela	Raja	of	Orchha,’	announced	an	attendant	as,
three	 months	 later,	 Salim	 and	 Suleiman	 Beg	 were	 standing	 on	 the	 tall	 crenellated	 walls	 of	 the	 fort	 at
Allahabad	 watching	 Salim’s	 cavalry	 drilling	 on	 the	 parade	 ground	 below.	 Nearby	 on	 the	 banks	 of	 the
Jumna	were	the	long,	straight	lines	of	tents	which	housed	the	fifty	thousand	men	who	by	now	had	gathered
to	his	banner,	more	than	half	as	many	again	as	he	had	originally	anticipated.
‘I	will	see	him	at	once.	Bring	him	to	me	here	on	the	walls.’
Five	minutes	later	a	tall,	thin	man	with	large	gold	hoops	in	both	ears	climbed	the	stone	staircase	up	to
the	 battlements.	 His	 clothes	 were	 travel-stained,	 and	 in	 one	 hand	 he	 was	 carrying	 a	 jute	 sack	 around
which	 several	 black	 flies	 were	 buzzing.	 When	 he	 was	 within	 a	 dozen	 feet	 of	 Salim	 the	 man	 placed	 the
sack	on	the	floor	and	prostrated	himself.
‘What	news	has	the	raja	for	me?’
Quickly	 regaining	 his	 feet,	 the	 envoy	 grinned,	 exposing	 uneven	 white	 teeth	 beneath	 his	 bushy	 dark
moustache.	‘News	that	will	gladden	your	heart,	Highness.’
‘Go	on,	then.’
‘Bir	Singh	has	fulfilled	your	wishes.’	While	he	spoke,	the	man	lifted	the	sack	once	more	and	unpicked
the	series	of	tight	knots	in	the	cord	holding	it	together.	As	he	opened	its	folds,	a	sweet,	sickly	smell	filled
the	still	air.	Then	he	reached	inside	and	pulled	out	by	the	hair	a	decaying	human	head.	Despite	the	bloated
putrescent	 flesh,	 the	 purple	 splitting	 lips	 and	 the	 dry	 clotted	 blood,	 Salim	 immediately	 recognised	 the
fleshy	 cheeks	 and	 long	 nose	 of	 Abul	 Fazl.	 A	 pale	 and	 shocked	 Suleiman	 Beg	 was	 gazing	 at	 the	 head,
clutching	his	stomach	as	if	about	to	vomit.
But	a	composed	and	unsurprised	Salim	simply	said,	‘The	raja	has	done	well	to	follow	my	orders.	Both
he	and	you	shall	have	your	promised	rewards	doubled.’	Then	he	turned	towards	Suleiman	Beg.	‘I	did	not
tell	you	in	advance	of	my	plans,	Suleiman	Beg,	for	your	own	protection	so	you	would	not	be	implicated	if
I	was	betrayed.	Abul	Fazl’s	death	was	necessary.	He	was	my	enemy.’	He	turned	back	to	the	envoy.	‘Tell
me	how	Abul	Fazl	perished.’
‘When	you	alerted	the	raja	that	you	expected	Abul	Fazl	to	travel	through	his	territory	while	returning
north	to	Agra	from	an	inspection	of	the	imperial	armies	fighting	on	the	borders	of	the	Deccan,	he	had	the

only	two	roads	that	he	could	use	to	traverse	our	mountainous	lands	carefully	watched.	About	a	month	ago,
he	 heard	 that	 Abul	 Fazl	 was	 approaching	 the	 westernmost	 one	 with	 an	 escort	 of	 about	 fifty	 men.	 Our
forces	 –	 I	 was	 among	 them	 –	 ambushed	 his	 party	 as	 he	 ascended	 a	 steep	 and	 narrow	 pass	 late	 one
afternoon.	 Our	 musketeers,	 hidden	 among	 boulders	 above	 the	 road,	 shot	 down	 many	 of	 Abul	 Fazl’s
bodyguards	 before	 they	 could	 even	 draw	 their	 weapons.	 However,	 Abul	 Fazl	 and	 about	 a	 dozen	 of	 his
men	succeeded	in	dismounting	unhurt	and	took	refuge	in	some	rocks	and	bushes	close	to	the	road.	From
that	cover	they	kept	up	accurate	fire	on	any	of	our	soldiers	who	approached,	wounding	several.	Among
them	was	one	of	my	own	brothers,	who	was	hit	in	the	mouth	by	a	bullet	which	carried	away	most	of	his
teeth	and	part	of	his	jawbone.	He	still	lives,	unable	to	speak	or	to	eat	properly,	but	for	his	sake	I	pray	that
his	death	is	not	much	longer	delayed.’
After	 pausing,	 sad-eyed	 for	 a	 moment,	 the	 envoy	 continued,	 ‘When	 the	 raja	 saw	 that	 Abul	 Fazl	 was
completely	 surrounded,	 he	 sent	 a	 messenger	 under	 a	 flag	 of	 truce	 with	 a	 promise	 that	 if	 Abul	 Fazl
surrendered	 he	 would	 spare	 his	 few	 surviving	 men.	 A	 few	 minutes	 later,	 Abul	 Fazl	 emerged	 from	 the
scrub	 and	 throwing	 down	 his	 sword	 calmly	 approached	 the	 raja.	 His	 face	 was	 expressionless	 as	 he
spoke.	“I	will	not	run	from	an	unwashed,	flea-ridden	hill	chieftain	such	as	you.	Do	with	me	what	you	will
but	remember	whom	I	serve.”
‘Enraged	 by	 his	 contemptuous	 words,	 the	 raja	 ran	 forward,	 drawing	 his	 serrated	 dagger	 from	 the
scabbard	 at	 his	 side	 as	 he	 did	 so.	 He	 seized	 Abul	 Fazl,	 who	 did	 not	 resist,	 by	 the	 throat	 and	 sawed
through	his	fat	neck	with	his	dagger.	I	have	seen	many	men	killed	but	I	have	never	seen	so	much	blood
flow	from	a	man	as	came	from	Abul	Fazl.	Then	the	raja	had	all	of	Abul	Fazl’s	bodyguard	who	were	still
alive	 killed,	 whether	 wounded	 or	 not,	 and	 ordered	 all	 the	 bodies	 to	 be	 buried	 deep	 enough	 to	 be
unreachable	by	the	digging	of	even	the	most	persistent	of	wild	dogs.’
‘Why	didn’t	he	keep	his	promise	to	spare	the	bodyguards?’	asked	Suleiman	Beg.
‘He	could	not	afford	to	do	so	for	fear	they	took	word	of	his	deed	to	the	emperor.	He	knew	that	Akbar’s
love	for	Abul	Fazl	would	mean	that	his	vengeance	on	his	killer,	if	known,	would	be	harsh.’
‘It	 was	 necessary,	 Suleiman	 Beg,’	 said	 Salim.	 ‘To	 achieve	 great	 ends	 we	 must	 sometimes	 use	 harsh
means	–	may	the	souls	of	the	brave	bodyguards	rest	in	Paradise.	Their	only	sin	was	to	serve	an	evil	man.
Abul	Fazl	was	constantly	poisoning	my	father’s	mind	against	me,	whispering	to	him	of	my	drunkenness
and	my	ambition,	advising	him	to	appoint	his	own	creatures	–	not	me	or	my	friends	–	to	positions	of	trust.
Even	my	grandmother	told	me	to	beware	of	him	–	that	he	was	no	friend	of	mine.	I	hated	him.	His	sneering
complacent	smile’	–	Salim’s	voice	was	rising	–	‘his	scarcely	concealed	contempt	.	.	.	there	were	so	many
times	I	wanted	to	push	back	down	his	throat	the	patronising,	hypocritical	words	he	spoke	to	me	before	my
father.’
Rage	at	the	recollection	of	Abul	Fazl’s	behaviour	coursed	through	Salim.	Suddenly	he	grabbed	the	head
and	 in	 one	 movement	 kicked	 it	 over	 the	 battlements.	 A	 piece	 of	 decaying	 flesh	 flew	 from	 it	 as	 his	 foot
struck	it	and	the	head	landed	with	a	dull	thud	in	the	rubbish-filled	dry	moat	below.	‘Good	riddance	to	a
bad	 man!	 Let	 the	 dogs	 gnaw	 out	 that	 lying	 flattering	 tongue	 of	 his	 and	 the	 crows	 peck	 at	 those	 fawning
inquisitive	eyes.’
That	evening	Salim	and	Suleiman	Beg	were	relaxing	in	Salim’s	private	apartments	in	the	fort.	Although
his	abstinence	from	opium	was	now	complete	Salim	had	taken	to	drinking	wine	once	more.	It	tasted	good
and	he	had	convinced	himself	that	he	was	now	strong	enough	to	be	its	master	rather	than	it	being	his.	Just
after	an	attendant	had	departed	after	bringing	them	another	bottle,	Suleiman	Beg	asked,	‘Don’t	you	fear
your	father’s	retribution	for	Abul	Fazl’s	death?	Why	did	you	provoke	him	so,	knowing	as	you	must	that	he
could	crush	our	forces	if	he	wished	to?’
‘I	realise	his	armies	are	strong	and	loyal	but	he	has	not	moved	against	us	in	the	months	we	have	been

here.	He	has	preferred	to	ignore	my	rebellion	beyond	issuing	proclamations	dismissing	me	as	a	foolish
ungrateful	 child	 and	 threatening	 confiscation	 of	 the	 property	 of	 any	 who	 join	 me.	 Instead,	 he	 has
concentrated	his	main	armies	in	the	Deccan	to	quell	the	rebellions	on	the	borders	of	the	empire.	I	don’t
expect	him	to	change	his	mind	and	attack	us	now.’
‘Why?	Abul	Fazl	was	his	friend	as	well	as	his	counsellor.’
‘And	I	am	his	son.	He	knows	he	must	think	about	the	future	of	our	dynasty.	When	Murad	died	–	almost	a
year	ago	now	–	and	with	his	grandsons	still	too	young,	he	must	have	recognised	that	if	it	was	to	survive	he
has	only	drunken	Daniyal	or	myself	to	choose	from	for	his	heir.	He	may	have	his	doubts	about	me,	but	he
must	 know	 he	 has	 little	 real	 choice	 about	 his	 successor.	 Now	 I’ve	 demonstrated	 to	 him	 by	 the	 death	 of
Abul	Fazl	that	I	can	act	decisively	and	be	as	ruthless	with	my	implacable	enemies	as	he	was	with	Hemu,
Adham	Khan	and	other	traitors,	he	will	be	unable	to	continue	to	ignore	me,	I	agree.	Instead	of	feeling	he
must	divert	his	armies	from	his	unfinished	southern	campaign,	I	expect	him	to	seek	to	conciliate	me.’
‘I	pray	for	all	our	sakes	that	you’ve	read	your	father	aright.’
‘Your	grandmother’s	caravan	is	no	more	than	two	miles	away,’	one	of	Salim’s	qorchis	announced.	Ever
since	her	steward,	the	stout	middle-aged	Badakhshani	who	a	few	years	ago	had	replaced	the	white-haired
old	man	Salim	had	known	all	his	life,	had	ridden	through	the	gateway	into	the	fortress	of	Allahabad	the
day	before,	Salim	had	been	nervously	awaiting	Hamida’s	arrival.	After	a	few	hours’	broken	sleep,	he	had
been	pacing	his	apartments	since	dawn,	steeling	himself	not	to	call	for	spirits	or	opium	to	calm	his	racing
mind.	He	would	be	glad	to	see	his	grandmother,	which	he	hadn’t	done	since	he	departed	from	his	father’s
court	many	months	ago	at	the	beginning	of	his	bid	to	establish	his	own	authority.	Despite	his	marriages
and	 his	 love	 for	 his	 mercurial,	 strong-minded	 mother,	 Hamida	 remained	 the	 woman	 he	 felt	 the	 greatest
affection	for.	He	had	always	been	able	to	rely	on	her	calm	sympathy	and	sound	common	sense,	knowing
that	she	was	motivated	only	by	love	and	affection	for	him.	However,	would	she	understand	why	he	had
felt	compelled	to	raise	troops	against	his	father?	Had	his	father	sent	her	to	him?	Had	she	come	on	her	own
initiative?	 Surely	 she	 must	 bring	 a	 message	 from	 Akbar,	 but	 what	 would	 it	 be?	 He	 felt	 much	 more
uncertain	of	his	father’s	reaction	than	he	had	claimed	to	Suleiman	Beg	when	first	hearing	of	Abul	Fazl’s
death.	Soon	he	would	find	out	for	sure.
‘Thank	you.	I’ll	come	to	the	courtyard	immediately	to	welcome	her	to	Allahabad	myself.’
Salim	had	only	been	standing	for	a	few	minutes	beneath	the	green	awning	in	the	sunlit	courtyard,	which
had	been	strewn	with	fragrant	rose	petals	on	his	orders,	when	he	saw	through	the	open	metal-bound	gates
the	leading	outriders	of	his	grandmother’s	procession	approach.	Then,	to	the	blaring	of	trumpets	and	the
beating	of	kettledrums	from	the	gatehouse,	the	large	elephant	bearing	Hamida	slowly	entered,	the	fringes
of	its	long	embroidered	surcoat	–	its	jhool	–	brushing	through	the	rose	petals.	The	interior	of	the	gilded
and	jewelled	howdah	was	carefully	screened	from	sun	and	prying	eyes	by	thin	cream	gauze	curtains.
As	soon	as	the	mahout	had	brought	the	elephant	gently	down	on	to	its	knees,	Salim	ordered	all	the	male
attendants	and	guards	to	depart.	Then	he	walked	slowly	towards	the	howdah,	mounted	the	small	portable
platform	 that	 had	 been	 placed	 next	 to	 it	 to	 assist	 its	 elderly	 occupant	 to	 descend	 and	 opened	 the	 gauze
curtains.	 As	 his	 eyes	 adjusted	 to	 the	 dimmer	 light	 inside,	 he	 made	 out	 the	 familiar	 figure	 of	 his
grandmother.	 Although	 she	 was	 now	 in	 her	 seventies,	 she	 was	 sitting	 as	 straight-backed	 as	 he
remembered.	Opposite	her,	head	bowed	respectfully,	was	one	of	her	favourite	attendants,	Zubaida,	his	old
nursemaid	whom	he	had	rescued	from	the	ravine	in	Kashmir.	Salim	leaned	forward	and	kissed	Hamida	on
the	forehead.
‘You	are	most	welcome	to	my	fortress	in	Allahabad,	Grandmother,’	he	said,	realising	as	he	spoke	how

awkward,	formal	and	even	assertive	he	sounded.
‘I’m	pleased	to	be	here.	You’ve	been	away	from	your	proper	place	at	the	heart	of	our	family	for	far	too
long.’	 Then,	 perhaps	 seeing	 the	 hardening	 expression	 on	 Salim’s	 face	 and	 anticipating	 a	 tirade	 of
exculpation,	Hamida	continued,	‘We’ll	talk	about	that	later.	Now	help	me	and	Zubaida	to	descend.’
Towards	dusk	that	evening,	Salim	walked	slowly	over	to	the	women’s	section	of	the	fortress	where	he
had	 had	 the	 best	 rooms	 –	 those	 on	 the	 highest	 storey	 overlooking	 the	 Ganges	 –	 prepared	 for	 his
grandmother’s	use.	Claiming	that	she	was	tired	after	the	journey	and	needed	to	wash	and	refresh	herself
and	then	to	rest,	Hamida	had	insisted	they	should	not	meet	again	until	the	heat	of	the	day	was	dying.	This
had	left	Salim	yet	more	time	to	brood	on	what	message	his	grandmother	might	have	and	to	try	to	interpret
the	few	words	they	had	exchanged.	He	had	even	wondered	whether	Hamida	had	brought	Zubaida,	now	at
least	eighty,	bent	and	totally	white-haired,	with	her	to	remind	him	both	of	his	childhood	and	of	the	times	in
Kashmir	 when	 he	 was	 closest	 to	 Akbar.	 Eventually	 he	 had	 abandoned	 such	 speculations	 as	 futile	 and
filled	 the	 time	 first	 by	 practising	 swordplay	 with	 Suleiman	 Beg	 and	 then	 by	 luxuriating	 in	 the	 fort’s
bathhouse.
Entering	the	cool	dark	staircase	leading	to	the	top	floor	of	the	women’s	quarters,	Salim	increased	his
pace,	once	more	eager	to	see	his	grandmother	and	hear	any	message	she	brought.	As	he	parted	the	silken
hangings	leading	into	her	room	he	saw	that	Hamida,	neatly	but	not	ostentatiously	dressed	in	purple	silk,
was	sitting	on	a	low	chair	while	Zubaida	put	the	finishing	touches	to	her	still	thick	hair	by	inserting	clasps
set	with	amethysts.	Seeing	her	grandson,	Hamida	asked	Zubaida	to	leave,	which	she	did,	bowing	to	Salim
as	she	went.
‘Sit	 down	 on	 that	 stool,	 Salim,	 where	 I	 can	 see	 you,’	 said	 Hamida.	 He	 did	 so	 despite	 the	 pulsing
tension	 within	 him	 which	 meant	 that	 he	 would	 have	 been	 far	 happier	 being	 free	 to	 roam	 the	 apartment.
Without	any	more	preliminaries	Hamida	began,	her	voice	as	soft	and	authoritative	as	he	remembered.
‘For	 the	 sake	 of	 the	 dynasty	 there	 must	 be	 no	 more	 posturing	 and	 parading	 of	 armies.	 You	 and	 your
father	must	be	reconciled	and	join	together	in	defeating	our	real	enemies	and	expanding	our	empire.’
‘I	 have	 never	 intended	 to	 harm	 the	 family.	 I	 respect	 our	 lineage	 and	 the	 deeds	 of	 our	 ancestors	 too
much.	I	want	the	empire	to	prosper	and	grow,	but	my	father	refuses	to	understand	my	desire	to	assist	him
by	sharing	in	the	imperial	duties.	Instead	he	misinterprets	my	actions	as	threats	to	his	authority.’
‘Easy	 enough	 for	 him	 to	 do	 so	 when	 you	 have	 had	 his	 chief	 counsellor	 and	 one	 of	 his	 best	 friends
murdered.’
‘I	.	.	.’
‘Don’t	deny	it,	Salim.	Honesty	has	always	been	something	we’ve	shared.’
‘Abul	Fazl	saw	me	as	a	threat	to	his	influence	and	powers	of	patronage.	I	have	long	since	despised	his
smooth	 hypocrisy	 and	 scarcely	 concealed	 corruption.	 His	 death	 can	 mark	 a	 new	 beginning	 in	 how	 the
court	is	run.’
‘And	indeed	perhaps	in	your	relationship	with	your	father.	But	have	you	got	the	insight	to	put	yourself
in	your	father’s	place	and	appreciate	how	much	Abul	Fazl’s	death	hurt	him?	I	think	not,	given	all	that’s
passed	 between	 you,	 so	 I	 will	 tell	 you.	 Imagine	 how	 you	 would	 feel	 if	 your	 father	 had	 Suleiman	 Beg
murdered.	After	the	treachery	of	his	own	milk-brother	and	milk-mother	your	father	never	trusted	anyone
fully	again.	I	even	think	that	their	betrayal	may	lie	behind	his	refusal	to	delegate	real	power	to	you	and
your	half-brothers.	However,	over	time	he	did	begin	to	rely	on	Abul	Fazl.	Think	then	how	he	felt	when	he
learned	of	his	murder	on	the	orders	of	someone	else	he	should	have	been	able	to	trust	–	yourself.
‘Your	 father	 heard	 the	 news	 when	 he	 was	 visiting	 the	 imperial	 pigeon	 cotes,	 testing	 the	 speed	 and
homing	ability	of	some	of	his	favourite	birds.	He	almost	collapsed	and	had	to	be	helped	weeping	to	his
apartments	 where	 he	 remained	 alone	 for	 two	 days,	 refusing	 to	 see	 anyone	 or	 eat	 anything.	 When	 he

emerged,	red-eyed,	dishevelled	and	unshaven,	he	ordered	a	week’s	court	mourning	for	Abul	Fazl.	Then	he
went	straight	to	reproach	your	mother	with	giving	birth	to	such	an	undutiful	son.	She	simply	told	him	that
she	was	glad	you	had	a	mind	of	your	own	to	stand	up	to	him.’
Salim	smiled	as	he	pictured	the	meeting	between	the	two.
‘Your	father’s	grief	is	not	a	cause	for	amusement,’	Hamida	continued	sternly.	‘When	I	visited	him,	he
broke	down	into	tears	again.	He	said,	“I	know	Salim	was	behind	this.	What	have	I	–	his	father	–	done	to
deserve	such	treatment	from	him?	My	people	and	my	courtiers	love	me	and	respect	me.	Why	cannot	my
eldest	 son	 do	 the	 same?”	 I	 tried	 to	 explain	 that	 you	 were	 still	 young	 and	 as	 such	 more	 alive	 to	 your
ambitions	and	your	need	for	experience	than	to	the	feelings	of	others.	But	I	told	him	that	even	so,	he	had
been	harder	and	less	sensitive	and	forgiving	in	his	handling	of	you	than	of	some	of	his	nobles.	I	reminded
him	his	own	father	had	died	before	there	could	be	any	conflict	of	ambitions	and	that	in	the	early	years	of
his	 rule	 he	 had	 been	 impatient	 and	 resentful	 of	 all	 restraint	 and	 advice.	 He	 acknowledged	 this	 only
grudgingly	at	first.	However,	after	more	discussions	over	the	succeeding	days,	in	which	I	appealed	to	him
to	 show	 to	 you	 the	 magnanimity	 and	 wisdom	 he	 is	 renowned	 for	 across	 the	 empire,	 he	 agreed	 to	 my
coming	here	to	see	if	you	could	be	reconciled.’
‘I	am	truly	glad	you	did,	but	is	it	really	in	my	father’s	character	to	allow	me	the	power	I	crave?	Isn’t	he
more	like	the	male	tiger	who	consumes	his	own	young	if	they	should	seem	to	threaten	his	authority?’
‘And	what	about	you,	Salim?	Can’t	you	admit	that	you	have	been	foolish	and	headstrong	at	times?	You
were	the	one	to	behave	like	a	young	male	animal	when	you	made	love	to	his	concubine	Anarkali.’
‘I	was	thoughtless	.	.	.	I	had	no	concern	for	the	consequences	of	my	lust,	only	for	the	lust	itself.	I	admit	I
was	wrong	.	.	.	I	cost	Anarkali	her	life,	and	yes,	on	that	occasion	I	strained	my	father’s	patience.’
‘That	is	an	understatement.	Your	father	is	a	great	man,	as	powerful	a	warrior	as	his	ancestors	Timur	and
Genghis	Khan	and	a	more	tolerant,	wiser	ruler	than	either.	I	know	that	the	parents	and	the	children	of	great
men	often	view	them	differently	from	others.	However,	you	showed	him	no	respect	as	a	parent,	as	a	man
or	as	an	emperor.	You	undermined	the	dignity	that	is	so	important	to	his	position.	A	less	forgiving	man	–
one	less	understanding	of	his	son’s	youthful	lust	–	would	have	had	you	executed	like	Anarkali.’
‘I	know	that,	and	I	am	grateful.	But	many	other	times	my	father	has	slighted	me	and	caused	me	to	lose
face	before	the	whole	court	by	his	dismissive	treatment	of	me.’
‘You	brought	him	pain	through	your	inability	to	control	your	other	appetites	–	not	just	your	lust.	Like
your	half-brothers	you’ve	staggered	around	the	court	helplessly	drunk	or	glassy-faced	with	opium.	Your
father	is	a	proud	man	and	very	conscious	of	his	imperial	dignity.	He	feels	your	behaviour	has	humiliated
him	as	well	as	you	in	the	eyes	of	the	court.’
‘But	I’ve	attempted	to	reform	my	habits,	unlike	Daniyal	–	or	Murad	when	he	was	alive.’
‘And	your	father	gives	you	credit	for	it.’
‘Does	he?	And	what	about	Abul	Fazl?’
‘He	thinks	you	tried	to	punish	him	by	killing	his	best	friend	but	he	insists	he	will	set	the	ties	of	blood
above	those	of	friendship	–	and	I	believe	he	will	try.	Indeed,	he	knows	he	must	do	so.	With	Murad	dead
and	Daniyal	still	soaked	in	alcohol,	you	and	in	due	course	your	sons	must	be	the	future	of	the	dynasty.’
A	wave	of	relief	swept	through	Salim.	He	had	been	right	in	his	analysis	of	his	father.	‘So	he	recognises
that	he	needs	me?’
‘Yes,	 and	 you	 should	 recognise	 that	 you	 need	 him	 more.	 He	 could	 crush	 your	 little	 rebellion	 if	 he
wanted	to.	Even	if	he	simply	publicly	disowned	and	disinherited	you,	you	would	find	it	difficult	to	retain
your	authority	or	your	followers.	You	do	understand	that,	don’t	you?’
Salim	 said	 nothing.	 His	 grandmother	 was	 right.	 His	 own	 position	 was	 not	 as	 strong	 as	 he	 liked	 to
pretend.	 His	 plan	 to	 force	 his	 father’s	 hand	 to	 give	 him	 power	 was	 going	 nowhere.	 The	 treasury	 of

Allahabad	was	emptying	fast.	He	would	need	to	find	more	money	soon	if	his	forces	were	not	to	begin	to
melt	away.	He	was	isolated	from	the	court	and	the	nobles	there,	many	of	whom	he	would	have	to	win	over
if	 he	 were	 to	 succeed	 his	 father.	 He	 wished	 to	 see	 his	 sons,	 who	 would	 have	 heard	 only	 their
grandfather’s	 views	 about	 his	 rebellion.	 Most	 important,	 he	 knew	 that	 latterly	 at	 least	 there	 had	 been
faults	 on	 both	 sides	 in	 his	 arguments	 with	 his	 father.	 But	 it	 hurt	 his	 pride	 to	 admit	 it.	 Finally	 he	 simply
said,	‘Yes.’
‘And	you	agree	to	be	reconciled?’
‘Yes	.	.	.	provided	that	I	am	not	humiliated	in	the	process.’
‘You	 will	 not	 be.	 I	 give	 you	 my	 word.	 Your	 father	 has	 agreed	 to	 allow	 me	 the	 responsibility	 of
organising	the	ceremony	before	the	court.’
‘Then	I	am	content.’
‘When	the	trumpets	sound	you	will	enter	the	durbar	hall	through	the	right-hand	door,’	said	Hamida.	Salim
had	accompanied	her	back	from	Allahabad	to	within	a	day’s	ride	from	Agra,	which	his	father	had	recently
restored	as	his	capital.	Then	he	had	encamped	while	Hamida	had	gone	on	alone	to	the	Agra	fort	to	tell
Akbar	of	his	son’s	agreement	to	their	reconciliation	and	to	put	in	hand	the	detailed	arrangements	for	the
ceremony.
‘And	you	are	sure	that	everyone	will	act	according	to	your	guidance?’
‘Yes.	Just	as	I	am	sure	that	you	will.	Now	ready	yourself.	I	must	take	my	place	behind	the	jali	screen.’
With	a	final	reassuring	smile	and	a	pat	on	his	shoulder,	Hamida	left	the	room.	He	had	only	time	to	look	at
himself	 briefly	 in	 the	 mirror	 and	 adjust	 the	 knotting	 of	 his	 green	 silk	 sash	 before	 the	 trumpets	 sounded.
Heart	thumping,	he	made	his	way	towards	the	doors	which	two	tall	green-turbaned	guards	threw	open	for
him.	 As	 he	 entered,	 he	 saw	 his	 father	 seated	 on	 his	 high-backed	 gilded	 throne,	 surrounded	 by	 his
courtiers.	 He	 was	 dressed	 completely	 in	 scarlet	 brocade,	 save	 for	 his	 white	 sash	 and	 his	 white
ceremonial	 turban	 with	 its	 two	 peacock’s	 feathers	 held	 in	 place	 by	 four	 large	 rubies.	 His	 grandfather’s
sword	 Alamgir	 was	 at	 his	 side,	 and	 as	 Salim	 came	 nearer	 he	 saw	 that	 his	 father	 was	 wearing	 their
ancestor	Timur’s	ring	with	its	snarling	tiger.
When	 Salim	 was	 within	 a	 few	 feet	 of	 his	 father	 and	 preparing	 to	 make	 his	 low	 obeisance,	 Akbar
suddenly	rose	and	stepped	down	from	his	throne	to	embrace	him.	After	some	moments,	he	released	him
and	turned	to	his	courtiers.
‘I	call	upon	you	to	witness	that	my	beloved	elder	son	and	I	are	reconciled.	All	our	past	disagreements
are	 forgotten.	 See,	 I	 present	 him	 with	 this	 my	 ceremonial	 turban	 as	 a	 token	 of	 our	 reunion.	 Henceforth
whoever	acts	against	one	of	us	will	need	to	fear	both.’	As	he	spoke,	Akbar	removed	his	turban	and	placed
it	on	his	son’s	head.
Tears	welled	in	Salim’s	eyes.	‘I	promise	to	honour	you	in	all	ways	and	to	be	loyal	in	my	obedience	to
your	every	command.’
However,	 a	 quarter	 of	 an	 hour	 later,	 as	 Salim	 left	 the	 audience	 chamber,	 some	 of	 the	 euphoria	 had
already	begun	to	dissipate	within	him.	Had	his	father’s	embrace	been	any	more	than	an	empty	piece	of
theatre?	Could	he	recall	any	warmth	in	Akbar’s	tone	of	voice	or	facial	expression	as	he	had	gone	on	to
recount	 the	 initial	 duties,	 none	 of	 great	 significance,	 which	 Salim	 would	 be	 required	 to	 perform	 on	 his
behalf?	Would	it	all	really	be	so	simple?

Chapter	28

Fathers	and	Sons

ide	hard,	Khusrau.	You	can	beat	him,’	Salim	shouted	across	the	parade	ground	below	the	Agra	fort.
His	eldest	son,	mounted	on	an	agile	black	pony,	was	swerving	the	animal	in	and	out	of	a	series	of
spears	 thrust	 into	 the	 hard	 ground.	 He	 was	 just	 behind	 another	 young	 man	 on	 a	 roan	 horse	 racing
through	a	parallel	set	of	spears	to	his	left.	Both	were	well	clear	of	a	third	youth	on	Khusrau’s	right,	who
had	already	failed	to	negotiate	one	pair	of	spears	and	had	to	wheel	his	pony	to	try	again.	Khusrau	had	just
succeeded	in	getting	his	pony’s	neck	ahead	when	a	minute	later	he	crossed	the	finishing	line,	head	bent
low	and	dust	billowing	in	his	wake.
How	his	son	had	changed	over	the	two	years	that	Salim	had	spent	at	Allahabad	and	elsewhere,	away
from	 Akbar’s	 court.	 When	 he	 had	 left,	 Khusrau	 had	 still	 been	 a	 boy.	 Now	 he	 was	 a	 young	 man	 of
seventeen.	Salim	regretted	more	than	ever	that	he	had	departed	in	such	total	secrecy	that	he	had	not	felt
able	to	take	even	Khusrau	or	Parvez	with	him	without	risking	jeopardising	his	plans.	It	had	been	even	less
possible	to	contemplate	taking	young	Khurram,	now	nearly	thirteen.	Since	his	birth	he	had	spent	most	of
his	 days	 with	 his	 grandfather	 and	 usually	 slept	 in	 Akbar’s	 apartments	 at	 night.	 Even	 now	 they	 were
standing	 together	 ten	 yards	 away.	 Both	 were	 vigorously	 applauding	 Khusrau,	 who	 had	 dismounted	 and
was	 striding	 lithe	 and	 full	 of	 youthful	 strength	 towards	 Akbar	 who	 was	 holding	 a	 riding	 crop	 with	 a
jewel-encrusted	handle	ready	to	present	to	his	eldest	grandson	as	his	prize	for	his	victory.
What	a	picture	of	familial	harmony	it	looked,	thought	Salim.	He	had	been	absent	from	the	family	group
for	too	long.	Walking	quickly,	he	reached	his	father	and	his	two	sons	just	as	Khusrau	took	the	riding	crop
from	Akbar’s	outstretched	hands.	‘Well	done,	Khusrau.	You	have	the	same	skill	as	a	horseman	that	I	had
in	 my	 youth,’	 Akbar	 was	 saying.	 Then,	 after	 what	 Salim	 thought	 was	 a	 meaningful	 glance	 at	 him,	 he
continued,	‘I	pray	that	you	retain	it,	together	with	those	other	fine	attributes	that	your	tutors	tell	me	you
possess.	 Never	 let	 them	 be	 fuddled	 by	 debilitating	 addictions	 or	 lusts	 as	 other	 members	 of	 our	 family
have.’
‘I	 assure	 you	 I	 will	 not,’	 replied	 Khusrau,	 looking	 directly	 at	 his	 grandfather.	 Salim	 realised	 he	 had
neither	 possessed	 nor	 received	 any	 encouragement	 from	 Akbar	 to	 develop	 such	 outward	 assurance	 and
confidence	when	he	was	Khusrau’s	age.
‘You	did	indeed	ride	well,	Khusrau.	I	too	congratulate	you,’	Salim	spoke	for	the	first	time.
‘Thank	you,	Father.	It	is	a	skill	I’ve	much	improved	in	the	time	you’ve	been	away.’
‘Khusrau	 and	 Khurram,	 would	 you	 like	 to	 accompany	 me	 to	 view	 my	 war	 elephants?’	 asked	 Akbar.
‘I’ve	some	fine	beasts	and	I	know	you,	Khusrau,	have	been	building	up	an	excellent	stable	of	your	own	of
young	 elephants	 collected	 from	 across	 the	 empire.	 Perhaps	 you’ll	 learn	 something	 from	 the	 training
methods	my	mahouts	use.’
Both	Salim’s	sons	nodded	enthusiastically	and	followed	their	grandfather,	who	had	already	turned	on
his	 heel	 and	 was	 heading	 for	 the	 stables.	 Resisting	 the	 childish	 temptation	 to	 shout	 that	 he	 had	 better
beasts	than	any	of	them,	Salim	watched	three	of	his	four	closest	male	relations	walk	away	from	him.	His
father,	he	was	almost	sure,	had	deliberately	excluded	him.	But	had	his	sons,	and	in	particular	Khusrau,

‘R

realised	what	Akbar	was	about	and	colluded	with	him?
‘What?	Are	you	sure	you	are	correct	about	what	you	overheard?’	Salim	almost	shouted	at	Suleiman	Beg
in	his	apartments	two	months	later.
‘Yes.	 I’d	 just	 finished	 bathing	 in	 one	 of	 the	 hammans	 reserved	 for	 commanders	 to	 use	 after	 parade
ground	exercises.	I	was	dressing	in	one	of	the	side	rooms	when	I	heard	two	officers	come	in.	I	couldn’t
see	them	from	where	I	was,	nor,	obviously,	could	they	see	me.	But	despite	the	splashing	of	the	water	in
the	 channels	 as	 they	 bathed,	 I	 heard	 their	 words	 clearly	 enough.	 The	 first	 asked,	 “Have	 you	 heard	 that
some	of	His	Majesty’s	courtiers	are	urging	him	to	appoint	Khusrau	as	his	heir	instead	of	either	Daniyal	or
Salim?”	and	the	second	replied,	“No,	but	I	can	see	merits	in	the	idea.	Daniyal’s	a	useless	drunk	and	Salim
lacks	the	self-discipline	not	to	relapse	at	any	moment.”’
Salim’s	face	stiffened	with	anger	but	he	said	nothing	as	Suleiman	Beg	continued.	‘The	first	spoke	again.
“True.	In	any	case,	Salim	will	seek	to	install	his	own	favourites	in	positions	of	power.	He	is	bound	to
prefer	 those	 who	 followed	 him	 in	 his	 traitorous	 rebellion	 to	 those	 of	 us	 who	 remained	 faithful	 to	 his
father.	We	may	be	lucky	if	we	escape	the	fate	of	Abul	Fazl.”	Then	some	more	officers	entered	and	the	two
speakers	broke	off	their	conversation	to	talk	of	other	matters.	But	I	am	certain	I’ve	given	you	the	gist	of
their	words.’
Salim	 still	 did	 not	 speak	 for	 some	 moments	 as	 he	 tried,	 not	 entirely	 successfully,	 to	 compose	 his
emotions.	Among	his	worst	fears	while	he	was	at	Allahabad	had	been	that	his	father	might	promote	one	of
his	 grandsons	 as	 his	 successor	 rather	 than	 himself,	 but	 such	 thoughts	 had	 centred	 around	 Khurram,	 so
clearly	 Akbar’s	 favourite,	 and	 he	 had	 been	 able	 to	 dismiss	 them	 on	 the	 grounds	 of	 Khurram’s	 youth.
Khusrau	 might	 now	 be	 a	 different	 proposition.	 He	 was	 older	 and,	 since	 his	 return,	 Salim	 himself	 had
noticed	 that	 his	 eldest	 son	 was	 gathering	 a	 band	 of	 confederates	 around	 him	 only	 a	 little	 older	 than
himself.	 Finally	 he	 asked,	 ‘Is	 this	 the	 first	 time	 you’ve	 heard	 traitorous	 idiots	 speak	 about	 such	 a
prospect?’
‘In	such	direct	terms,	yes.’	Suleiman	Beg	looked	uneasy	as	he	continued,	‘But	I’ve	heard	others	express
doubts	about	their	own	fate	should	you	succeed.	It’s	only	natural	that	they	should	worry	about	the	length
and	depth	of	your	rift	with	your	father	and	the	newness	of	its	healing.	It’s	only	a	short	step	from	that	to
thinking	about	alternatives.’
‘I	will	not	allow	this,’	Salim	yelled,	rage	welling	within	him	as	he	seized	a	jewelled	dish	from	the	low
table	 beside	 him	 and	 threw	 it	 hard	 against	 the	 wall,	 dislodging	 some	 turquoise	 and	 ruby	 stones	 and
denting	the	dish	itself.
‘Calm	down,’	said	Suleiman	Beg.	‘You	can’t	stop	people	talking	or	thinking	about	what’s	best	for	them.
It’s	human	nature.	You	need	to	exert	influence	yourself.	Convince	more	people	of	your	own	virtues	and
suitability	to	rule.’
‘Perhaps	 you’re	 right,’	 said	 Salim,	 his	 anger	 subsiding	 a	 little.	 ‘But	 how,	 after	 the	 time	 I’ve	 spent
away?’
‘Try	to	show	you	will	let	bygones	be.’
‘Maybe	one	way	might	be	by	offering	some	of	the	sons	of	my	father’s	advisers	appointments	among	my
own	counsellors.’
‘Wouldn’t	that	run	the	risk	of	introducing	spies	and	discord	amongst	us?’
‘Perhaps,	but	in	truth	we	have	little	to	hide.	What	have	I	done	since	my	return?	Nothing	other	than	wait
patiently	again	and	respond	willingly	to	every	trivial	request	my	father’s	made	of	me.	I’ve	bottled	up	my
emotions,	speaking	only	to	you	of	my	regret	that	the	emperor	will	still	not	grant	me	more	powers	or	give

me	some	military	command.’
‘Your	 father	 might	 be	 forgiven	 for	 not	 wishing	 to	 put	 you	 in	 charge	 of	 large	 armies	 until	 he	 is	 more
certain	of	your	intentions.’
‘I	 suppose	 I	 can	 understand	 that	 from	 his	 point	 of	 view,’	 Salim	 responded,	 almost	 smiling.	 After	 a
pause	 his	 brows	 knitted	 once	 more.	 ‘You	 don’t	 really	 think	 my	 father	 would	 ever	 contemplate
disinheriting	me	in	favour	of	my	son,	do	you?’
‘To	be	truthful,	I	don’t	know	.	.	.	Even	though	he’s	over	sixty	he	remains	a	clever	and	complex	man	well
attuned	to	understanding	the	motives	and	concerns	of	those	around	him	without	ever	disclosing	his	own.
Possibly	he	might	have	considered	giving	a	little	tacit	encouragement	to	the	idea	of	Khusrau	succeeding
him,	knowing	that	you	would	come	to	hear	of	it.	In	this	way	he	might	seek	to	increase	the	pressure	on	you
to	continue	to	conform	to	his	wishes	and	indeed	to	your	reformed	way	of	life.’
‘That	would	be	typical	of	him	and	his	cold	machinations,’	Salim	shouted	again,	grinding	his	heel	into
one	of	the	thick	rugs	covering	the	floor	before	adding	more	quietly,	‘My	father	still	has	no	regard	for	my
feelings.	Nor	perhaps	for	those	of	any	other	of	his	relations.	When	Khusrau	comes	to	hear	of	suggestions
that	he	might	succeed,	it	will	only	raise	unrealistic	expectations	in	him.’
‘So	what	do	you	intend	to	do?’
‘On	the	surface	to	ignore	the	rumours	and	continue	to	act	the	dutiful	son,	but	privately	to	draw	more
followers	to	me	with	promises	of	rewards	when	I	come	to	power,	and	to	ensure	I	have	enough	officers
and	 well-armed	 men	 to	 call	 on	 should	 the	 need	 arise.	 I’ll	 want	 your	 help	 with	 this.	 You	 can	 talk	 more
freely	than	I.’
‘You	will	have	it,	Highness.’
‘Meanwhile	I	will	try	to	find	opportunities	to	probe	Khusrau’s	attitudes	and	ambitions	.	.	.’
Salim	lost	no	time	in	arranging	a	meeting	with	Khusrau	and	it	was	only	thirty-six	hours	later	when	father
and	son	met	at	the	archery	butts.	‘I’m	so	pleased	that	you	could	join	me	today,’	said	Salim	as	he	put	his
arrow	to	the	string	of	his	double-curved	bow	and	squinting	along	the	shaft	took	careful	aim	at	the	strawstuffed	target,	which	was	shaped	and	roughly	dressed	as	a	man.	Moments	later,	the	arrow	hissed	through
the	air	to	thud	into	the	target’s	torso.
‘Good	shot,	Father,’	said	Khusrau	as	he	fitted	his	own	arrow	and	fired,	striking	the	target	within	an	inch
of	Salim’s	shaft.	Lowering	his	bow,	he	added,	‘I	am	always	pleased	to	spend	time	with	you.’
‘Good.	 We	 have	 been	 apart	 too	 long.	 I	 would	 not	 wish	 you	 to	 think	 you	 were	 absent	 from	 my	 mind
while	I	was	in	Allahabad	all	those	months.’
‘I	did	not.’
‘What	I	did	I	did	for	the	good	of	the	dynasty,	for	those	who	come	to	rule	after	me.’
Khusrau	gave	a	wry	smile.	‘But	my	grandfather	rules	now.	God	willing	it	will	be	a	long	time	before	he
is	called	to	his	reward	in	Paradise.	Who	can	tell	what	may	happen	to	any	of	us	in	the	meantime.’
‘What	do	you	mean?’	asked	Salim,	his	tone	sharper	than	he	meant	it	to	be	as	he	raised	his	bow	again
and	fired.
‘Simply	that	none	of	us	can	know	what	may	happen	during	the	years	he	continues	to	rule.	All	of	us	are
mortal.	 Even	 if	 we	 live,	 the	 passage	 of	 time	 changes	 us	 and	 others’	 perception	 of	 us.’	 Khusrau	 shot
another	arrow.	This	time	it	split	Salim’s	last	shaft	as	it	embedded	itself	deep	in	the	straw	man.	Was	that
shot	 simply	 a	 trick	 of	 fortune	 or	 an	 omen?	 wondered	 Salim,	 involuntarily	 recalling	 the	 Sikri	 mystic’s
warning	to	beware	his	sons.	He	fitted	another	arrow	and	fired,	striking	the	straw	man	in	the	throat.
‘You	are	right	that	our	lives	are	subject	to	divine	providence,	but	we	should	all	wish	them	to	follow	a

natural	progression	where	sons	outlive	fathers	and	only	then	succeed	in	due	order	to	their	positions	and
responsibilities.	None	of	us,	I’m	sure,	would	want	it	to	be	otherwise.’
Khusrau	said	nothing	for	a	moment,	then	simply	replied,	‘I	would	not	wish	that	any	more	than	you.	I
agree	we’re	all	in	God’s	hands.’
As	they	continued	their	practice,	as	if	by	mutual	consent	drawing	back	from	any	confrontation,	father
and	son	turned	their	conversation	towards	everyday	matters	of	court	life.	However,	as	he	packed	away	his
bow	in	its	rosewood	case	at	the	end	of	the	session	while	Khusrau	walked	back	across	the	courtyard	to
join	his	grandfather	in	the	elephant	stables,	Salim	knew	that	ambition	had	been	sparked	in	the	heart	of	his
mettlesome	eldest	son	whether	by	Akbar	or	not.	He	must	remain	on	his	guard	both	to	extend	his	network
of	allies	and	conciliate	his	enemies.	Above	all,	he	must	do	everything	he	could	to	impress	his	father,	even
if	 that	 meant	 concealing	 his	 true	 opinions.	 It	 would	 not	 be	 easy,	 but	 the	 reward	 of	 the	 throne	 would	 be
worth	it.
Tears	 coursed	 down	 the	 cheeks	 of	 both	 Akbar	 and	 Salim	 as	 the	 coffin	 was	 borne	 on	 a	 simple	 flowerdecked	wooden	bier	through	a	side	gate	of	the	Agra	fort	towards	the	boat	that	would	carry	it	up	the	Jumna
to	Delhi	for	burial	next	to	Humayun.	Grief	at	Hamida’s	death	was	uniting	the	two	men	in	a	way	that	would
have	pleased	Hamida	herself.	She	had	slipped	gently	into	death	in	her	seventy-eighth	year	after	only	a	few
days’	illness	with	what	had	at	first	seemed	a	simple	cough	but	quickly	turned	into	something	much	worse.
As	Akbar	and	Salim	had	sat	on	either	side	of	the	low	bed	on	which	she	was	lying,	she	had	bid	them
goodbye.	As	fluid	wheezed	in	her	chest	she	had	whispered	to	them	to	love	each	other	as	she	loved	them
both,	if	not	for	her	sake	then	for	that	of	their	dynasty.	Stretching	their	arms	across	her	frail	body	at	her
request	 to	 clasp	 each	 other’s	 hands,	 they	 had	 agreed	 to	 do	 so.	 Only	 minutes	 later,	 as	 the	 light	 of	 the
crescent	 moon	 entered	 through	 the	 casement	 and	 a	 soft	 breeze	 rippled	 the	 gauze	 curtains,	 she	 had	 died.
Her	last	words	were,	‘I	am	coming	through	the	stars	to	join	you	in	Paradise,	Humayun.’
What	 must	 be	 going	 through	 his	 father’s	 mind,	 Salim	 wondered	 as	 he	 fought	 to	 control	 his	 own
emotions.	 Akbar	 must	 be	 growing	 conscious	 of	 his	 own	 mortality	 after	 the	 death	 of	 Gulbadan	 a	 few
months	previously	and	then	Hamida’s.	He	was	the	oldest	member	of	his	family	now	as	well	as	–	as	he	had
long	been	–	its	head.	He	had	lost	a	mother	who	had	loved	him	and	protected	him	both	in	the	very	early
days	 after	 his	 birth	 at	 Umarkot	 and	 when,	 after	 his	 father’s	 untimely	 death,	 rebellion	 had	 threatened.
Hamida’s	love	for	Akbar	had	been	unconditional,	as	Salim	knew	it	had	been	for	himself.	That	was	why	he
too	would	miss	her	more	than	he	could	say,	feeling	as	he	could	not	help	but	feel	that	both	his	mother’s
love	and	that	of	Akbar	were	conditional	on	his	adherence	to	their	wishes,	to	their	view	of	the	world.
Salim	glanced	towards	Daniyal,	hunched	and	prematurely	aged	on	his	father’s	other	side.	His	surviving
half-brother	had	only	arrived	back	at	the	court	an	hour	before	from	the	isolated	palace	near	Fatehpur	Sikri
he	occupied	at	Akbar’s	command	and	was	visibly	shaking.	Salim	suspected	it	was	from	either	the	effects
of	 alcohol	 or	 the	 lack	 of	 it	 rather	 than	 from	 grief.	 Then	 Salim	 looked	 at	 his	 own	 three	 sons,	 Khusrau,
Parvez	 and	 Khurram,	 standing	 next	 to	 him.	 Perhaps	 understandably	 none	 seemed	 as	 affected	 as	 himself
and	Akbar,	not	having	known	Hamida	so	well	or	for	so	long.	Did	they	find	him	as	difficult	to	read	as	he
did	 his	 own	 father?	 Salim	 wondered,	 not	 for	 the	 first	 time.	 If	 they	 had	 gone	 to	 Hamida	 and	 asked	 her,
would	she	have	told	them	to	respect	him	and	learn	from	him,	as	she	had	told	him	to	do	from	Akbar	many
years	before?
She	 would	 have	 been	 too	 honest	 to	 do	 so	 unreservedly.	 She	 had	 recognised	 his	 faults:	 not	 only	 his
drinking,	 his	 opium	 taking	 and	 his	 lusts	 but	 also	 his	 short	 temper,	 his	 impatience	 and	 his	 unforgiving
hatred	 and	 hunger	 for	 vengeance	 against	 those	 such	 as	 Abul	 Fazl	 who	 he	 thought	 mistreated	 him.

However,	 despite	 these	 failings	 she	 had	 still	 believed	 in	 him	 and	 his	 ability	 to	 redeem	 his	 faults	 if	 he
came	to	rule.	He	hoped	she	would	have	said	as	much	to	his	sons	too.	If	she	ever	had,	Khusrau	at	least	had
shown	no	signs	of	taking	the	message	on	board.	He	continued	to	distance	himself	from	his	father,	correct,
formal	 and	 emotionless	 when	 they	 met	 but	 seeming	 to	 avoid	 contact	 whenever	 he	 could	 and,	 Salim
suspected,	 continuing	 to	 hope	 to	 supplant	 him.	 That	 was	 perhaps	 how	 Akbar	 felt	 about	 himself,	 Salim
realised.	 Then	 he	 looked	 across	 at	 his	 father’s	 lined	 and	 tear-stained	 face	 and	 instinctively,	 almost
involuntarily,	placed	his	hand	on	his	elbow	in	a	gesture	of	understanding	and	support	in	his	present	grief.
As	 the	 drums	 beat	 a	 slow	 and	 mournful	 tattoo	 and	 Hamida’s	 body	 was	 carried	 carefully	 up	 the	 boat’s
gangplank,	Akbar	allowed	his	son’s	hand	to	remain	on	his	arm	while	he	took	his	leave	of	his	mother	on
earth.
‘Suleiman	Beg,	you’re	bleeding.	What’s	happened?’	Salim	exclaimed	as	his	milk-brother	pushed	his	way
through	the	hangings	covering	the	doorway	into	Salim’s	apartment,	crimson	blood	staining	his	green	tunic
and	running	down	his	left	hand	and	fingers	to	drip	on	to	the	white	marble	floor.
‘Just	a	small	argument	about	the	succession	and	a	flesh	wound.’
‘Come	here,	let	me	see.	Should	I	summon	the	hakim?’
‘Perhaps.	Scratch	though	this	wound	is,	I	may	require	his	needle	and	thread.’	Suleiman	Beg	held	out	his
hand	and	Salim	ripped	back	the	fabric	of	his	tunic	sleeve	to	reveal	the	wound	–	a	three-inch-long	slash	to
the	upper	arm	just	above	the	elbow.	As	Salim	dabbed	the	blood	away	with	his	own	neckcloth	he	saw	that
it	had	exposed	some	creamy	yellow	fat	and	some	muscle	but	had	not	penetrated	to	the	bone.
‘You’re	right.	It’s	a	clean	wound	and	not	too	deep,	but	you	will	need	the	hakim.	It’s	bleeding	a	lot	so
hold	 your	 arm	 above	 your	 head	 to	 lessen	 the	 flow	 while	 I	 bind	 it.’	 As	 he	 wound	 his	 neckcloth	 around
Suleiman	 Beg’s	 muscled	 biceps,	 he	 shouted	 for	 one	 of	 his	 attendants	 to	 fetch	 the	 hakim	 and	 then	 asked
Suleiman	Beg	once	more,	this	time	with	a	concern	in	his	voice	that	went	beyond	his	care	for	his	closest
friend,	‘What	happened?	How	do	you	mean,	an	argument	about	the	succession?’
‘I	 was	 walking	 through	 the	 courtyard	 past	 a	 band	 of	 Khusrau’s	 youthful	 followers	 when	 one	 said	 to
another	in	a	voice	deliberately	raised	for	me	to	hear,	“There	goes	old	Suleiman	Beg.	I	pity	him.	He	has
backed	the	wrong	candidate	to	succeed	the	emperor.	Unlike	us,	when	Khusrau	comes	to	power	–	and	not
his	rebel	of	a	father	–	he’ll	be	left	with	nothing.	Perhaps	one	of	us	should	make	him	our	khutmagar,	 our
butler.	He	must	know	enough	about	wine.	He’ll	have	poured	plenty	for	Salim.”	I	knew	the	taunt	was	meant
to	provoke	me	but	I	couldn’t	help	myself.	I	turned	and	walked	up	to	the	group,	grabbed	the	speaker	by	the
throat,	flung	him	back	against	one	of	the	pillars	and	invited	him	to	repeat	what	he’d	said.	He	spluttered
that	the	time	for	my	generation	was	past.	When	the	emperor	died	we’d	be	passed	over.	It	would	be	for	the
young	to	succeed.
‘Then	I	told	him,	tightening	my	grip	around	his	throat,	to	ask	me	to	become	his	khutmagar,	if	he	would.
He	said	nothing.	I	squeezed	harder	still.	His	face	was	turning	purple	and	his	eyes	were	popping.	If	I’d
persisted	a	minute	longer	he’d	have	been	dead.	Suddenly	I	felt	a	sharp	stinging	pain	in	my	arm.	One	of	his
companions,	 bolder	 than	 the	 rest,	 had	 slashed	 me	 with	 his	 dagger	 to	 make	 me	 release	 my	 grip.	 For	 a
moment	 my	 eyes	 met	 my	 assailant’s,	 both	 of	 us	 appalled	 at	 what	 had	 happened	 and	 even	 more	 at	 what
might	have	happened	.	.	.	Then	Khusrau’s	little	adherents	ran	off,	hauling	with	them	their	loud-mouthed
companion,	 who	 was	 still	 gasping	 for	 breath.	 His	 throat	 will	 hurt	 for	 days	 and	 he	 should	 at	 least	 think
twice	before	provoking	his	betters	again.’
‘I	 couldn’t	 have	 shown	 the	 restraint	 you	 did,’	 said	 Salim.	 ‘Khusrau’s	 followers	 are	 becoming	 ever
bolder,	 posturing	 and	 strutting	 around	 and	 proclaiming	 my	 son’s	 virtues	 and	 his	 fitness	 to	 rule.	 Since

Daniyal’s	miserable	death	left	me	the	only	survivor	of	my	father’s	sons,	their	clamour	for	the	crown	to
skip	a	generation	has	become	more	intense	and	more	open.	How	dare	they	attack	you?	It’s	as	if	they	want
to	see	how	far	they	can	go	or	perhaps	even	provoke	me	into	action	against	them,	thus	alienating	my	father.’
‘Why	doesn’t	the	emperor	stop	them?’
‘I	don’t	know.	He’s	aged	a	lot	since	the	deaths	of	his	mother	and	Daniyal.	Suddenly	he	looks	his	sixtytwo	years	and	his	bouts	of	stomach	problems	have	become	more	frequent.	His	greatest	interest	seems	to
be	in	the	company	of	Khurram,	testing	and	probing	his	abilities	and	teaching	him	in	a	way	he	never	did
with	his	sons	or	indeed	his	other	grandsons.’
‘Sometimes	I	wonder	if	he	isn’t	deliberately	letting	Khusrau	and	his	followers	push	their	case	to	see
what	level	of	support	they	can	muster	compared	to	ourselves.’
‘Perhaps	so.	I’ve	been	pleased	that	even	some	of	the	older	nobles	promoted	on	Abul	Fazl’s	urgings	are
now	 beginning	 to	 cultivate	 my	 favour,	 perturbed	 by	 Khusrau’s	 pressure	 for	 youth	 to	 rule	 experience.
Maybe	my	father	is	being	more	astute	than	I	give	him	credit	for	and	is	flushing	out	the	preferences	of	his
courtiers.’
‘Frail	as	he	is	becoming,	the	emperor	should	never	be	underestimated.’
‘But	then	how	do	you	explain	his	outbursts	against	me?	The	other	day,	for	example,	when	he	criticised
my	handling	of	some	of	the	military	training,	suggesting	in	front	of	the	whole	court	I	had	been	negligent	or
in	an	opium	trance	just	because	a	fool	of	an	officer,	as	the	man	later	admitted,	had	misheard	my	command
and	turned	his	squadron	in	the	wrong	direction	on	the	parade	ground.’
‘All	men	hate	to	lose	their	grip	on	power.	Sometimes	if	they	feel	it	slipping	they	cannot	help	but	lash
out	in	frustration	at	their	successors,	raging	inwardly	at	their	debility	and	the	transitoriness	of	power	and
even	of	life	itself.’
‘You’re	becoming	a	philosopher,	Suleiman	Beg,’	said	Salim	as	one	of	his	qorchis	appeared	through	the
hangings	of	the	doorway	to	announce	hakim’s	arrival.	‘Enough.	Let’s	talk	more	later.	Now	you	must	let	the
hakim	perfect	his	embroidery	on	you.’
‘What	 is	 it,	 Khurram?’	 said	 Salim,	 surprised	 to	 see	 his	 youngest	 son	 approaching	 across	 the	 courtyard
where	he	and	Suleiman	Beg	were	playing	chess.
‘My	grandfather	says	that	it	will	aid	his	recovery	to	full	health	to	watch	you	and	Khusrau	pit	your	best
fighting	elephants	one	against	the	other.’
Salim	and	Suleiman	Beg	exchanged	glances.	‘When?’
‘Later	this	afternoon	when	it	grows	a	little	cooler.	My	grandfather	wishes	the	fight	to	take	place	on	the
banks	of	the	Jumna	below	the	fort	so	he	can	watch	from	the	jharoka	balcony.’
‘Tell	 him	 that	 I	 am	 happy	 to	 obey	 and	 that	 I	 will	 send	 my	 favourite	 fighting	 elephant,	 World	 Shaker,
against	Khusrau’s.’
‘Yes,	Father.’
‘Have	you	spoken	yet	to	your	brother?’
‘It	 was	 Khusrau	 who	 suggested	 holding	 a	 fight	 when	 he	 came	 to	 visit	 Grandfather	 today.	 He	 was
praising	a	giant	elephant	he’d	imported	from	Bengal	called	Damudar	that	has	never	yet	been	beaten.’
‘It	will	be	a	good	contest	then.	World	Shaker	has	never	lost	a	fight	either.’	Salim	smiled	at	his	son,	but
as	soon	as	Khurram	had	left	his	smile	faded.	‘Khusrau	has	deliberately	contrived	this	contest.	I’m	certain
of	it.	He	hopes	to	defeat	me	before	all	the	court.’
‘Perhaps	he	does,	but	how	can	he	be	sure	his	elephant	will	beat	yours?’
‘He	is	conceited	enough	to	believe	this	Bengal	fighter	of	his	is	invincible.	But	even	if	not,	he	will	know

that	the	very	fact	of	holding	the	fight	will	suggest	to	the	world	that	he	and	I	are	equals	–	both	contenders
for	my	father’s	favour.	You	know	better	than	anyone	the	extent	of	his	and	his	supporters’	ambitions	.	.	.
You	carry	the	scar.	He	will	think	victory	for	him	will	be	seen	as	a	symbol	and	an	omen.’
‘So	what	will	you	do?’
‘Everything	I	can	to	make	sure	my	elephant	wins.	Send	for	Suraj	and	Basu,	my	best	mahouts.	We	still
have	a	few	hours	to	prepare.’
News	of	the	elephant	fight	spread	quickly	and	as	the	time	drew	near	excited	spectators	crowded	the	wide,
hard-baked	 riverbank	 beneath	 the	 Agra	 fort.	 The	 area	 where	 the	 fight	 was	 to	 take	 place	 –	 an	 enclosure
two	hundred	feet	long	and	fifty	feet	wide	–	had	been	created	by	piling	jute	sacks	of	earth	one	on	top	of	the
other	to	the	height	of	a	man’s	shoulder,	leaving	a	gap	on	the	west	and	east	sides	for	the	elephants	to	enter.
A	six-foot-high	earth	barrier	running	across	width-wise	divided	the	enclosure	into	two.
Salim	was	standing	on	the	jharoka	balcony	with	Khusrau	and	Khurram	behind	the	low	throne	on	which
Akbar,	wrapped	in	a	fine	embroidered	Kashmiri	wool	shawl,	was	seated.	Looking	down,	Salim	noticed
the	purple	tunics	and	cloth-of-silver	turbans	of	Khusrau’s	men	among	the	crowds	below.	He	could	also
see	 the	 red	 and	 gold	 clothing	 of	 some	 of	 his	 own	 attendants,	 including	 Zahed	 Butt,	 the	 captain	 of	 his
bodyguard.	He	glanced	at	his	eldest	son.	Khusrau	was	looking	very	confident	and	something	he	had	just
said	to	Akbar	made	his	grandfather	laugh.
The	emperor	raised	his	hand	and	at	the	signal	a	trumpeter	high	on	the	battlements	put	his	six-foot-long
bronze	 instrument	 to	 his	 lips	 and	 gave	 three	 short	 blasts	 –	 the	 signal	 for	 the	 elephants	 to	 proceed	 from
their	 stables,	 the	 hati	 mahal,	 down	 the	 ramp	 from	 the	 fort	 and	 along	 the	 riverbank.	 First,	 to	 the
accompaniment	of	kettledrums	booming	out	from	above	the	gatehouse,	came	the	fifteen-foot-tall	Damudar,
wearing	a	purple	velvet,	silver-fringed	jhool,	his	great	legs	loosely	shackled	with	silver	chains	to	prevent
him	from	bolting.	His	mahout	was	seated	on	his	neck	and	holding	the	long	boathook-like	metal	rod	used
to	control	the	animal	during	the	fight.	A	second	mahout	was	perched	immediately	behind.	It	would	be	his
job	to	take	over	should	the	first	man	fall	or	be	injured.	Damudar’s	forehead	and	eyes	were	protected	by	a
shining	steel	plate	that	ended	halfway	down	his	trunk	and	his	tusks	were	painted	gold	except	for	the	tips,
which	 were	 scarlet.	 As	 Damudar	 emerged	 from	 the	 fort	 and	 made	 his	 stately	 way	 towards	 the	 fight
enclosure,	Khusrau’s	supporters	on	the	riverbank	roared	their	approval.
Craning	 his	 neck,	 Salim	 could	 now	 see	 his	 own	 elephant	 –	 a	 gift	 from	 Jodh	 Bai’s	 father	 –	 walking
slowly	down	the	ramp	with	Suraj	sitting	on	his	neck	in	front	of	Basu.	World	Shaker	was	smaller	by	nearly
a	foot	than	Khusrau’s	beast	but	his	silvered	tusks	were	longer	and	more	curved.	The	Rajputs	trained	their
elephants	well	and	World	Shaker	had	proved	his	fearlessness	many	times.
As	soon	as	Damudar	and	World	Shaker	had	each	entered	their	own	side	of	the	enclosure,	bags	of	earth
were	piled	up	behind	them	to	close	the	gaps	in	the	arena	walls.	While	this	was	being	done,	the	elephants’
jhools	 had	 been	 removed	 and	 the	 beasts	 were	 already	 trumpeting	 angrily	 at	 each	 other	 with	 Khusrau’s
Damudar	swinging	his	great	grey	head	from	side	to	side.	Salim	felt	his	blood	begin	to	pump.	Glancing	at
Khusrau	he	saw	from	the	rapid	rise	and	fall	of	his	chest	that	he	too	was	excited.	Had	he	misjudged	his
son?	Was	this	simply	a	contest	between	two	fighting	elephants	to	amuse	the	sick	emperor?	But	watching
Khusrau	 bend	 to	 whisper	 again	 in	 Akbar’s	 ear,	 Salim	 was	 sure	 he	 had	 understood	 his	 son’s	 motives
correctly.
Youths	 were	 now	 darting	 between	 the	 elephants’	 legs	 to	 remove	 their	 chains.	 They	 had	 barely
scrambled	 from	 the	 enclosure	 when	 with	 a	 great	 roar	 Khusrau’s	 elephant	 stormed	 towards	 the	 central
barrier	and	standing	up	on	his	hind	legs	brought	his	two	front	legs	crashing	down.	Then	he	reared	up	again

as	if	he	couldn’t	wait	to	get	at	World	Shaker	who,	guided	by	Suraj’s	gentle	taps,	was	withdrawing	slowly
backwards	from	his	own	side	of	the	barrier.	Salim	saw	Khusrau’s	grin	of	triumph	as	Damudar	continued
to	smash	his	way	through.
Moments	later,	with	his	two	riders	clinging	to	his	neck,	the	bellowing	Damudar	trampled	with	his	great
pillar-like	 legs	 the	 remains	 of	 the	 barrier	 and	 charged	 forward	 into	 World	 Shaker’s	 half	 of	 the	 arena,
kicking	earth	and	dust	up	into	the	air	as	he	went.	Suraj	was	still	holding	World	Shaker	back,	exactly	as	he
and	Salim	had	planned	he	should,	to	lure	his	opponent	into	making	a	rush	attack.	You	could	never	be	sure
of	anything	in	an	elephant	fight	but	it	should	be	the	right	tactic,	Salim	thought	to	himself.	World	Shaker
was	smaller	and	nimbler	than	Khusrau’s	elephant.
As	 Damudar	 crashed	 forward,	 trunk	 high	 in	 the	 air	 and	 tusk	 tips	 horizontal,	 towards	 World	 Shaker,
Salim	wondered	whether	Suraj	had	left	it	too	late.	But	at	the	very	last	moment,	just	as	Damudar	seemed
about	to	smash	into	them,	with	a	shouted	command	and	a	tap	of	his	bar	on	the	elephant’s	right	shoulder
Suraj	 made	 World	 Shaker	 step	 quickly	 to	 one	 side,	 avoiding	 Damudar’s	 onrush.	 At	 the	 same	 time	 the
elephant	 tossed	 up	 his	 head	 so	 that	 his	 tusks,	 filed	 to	 fine	 sharp	 points,	 inflicted	 a	 jagged	 gash	 to
Damudar’s	left	side	as	he	passed.	Blood	at	once	began	seeping	from	the	wound.	As	Damudar	stumbled
off,	trumpeting	in	pain,	Suraj	urged	World	Shaker	in	pursuit.	He	caught	up	with	Damudar	close	to	the	earth
bags	 enclosing	 the	 arena.	 There	 Damudar’s	 driver,	 still	 struggling	 to	 bring	 his	 panicked	 and	 wounded
beast	back	under	full	control,	somehow	managed	to	swing	him	round	to	confront	World	Shaker.
Urged	on	by	their	drivers	and	the	shouts	of	the	crowd,	the	two	elephants	rose	up	repeatedly	on	their
hind	legs,	each	seeking	a	way	to	gore	the	other.	Within	moments	World	Shaker	had	succeeded	in	slashing
open	Damudar’s	trunk	just	beneath	his	steel	head	armour.	Then,	as	Damudar	staggered	back,	he	followed
up	by	thrusting	one	of	his	tusks	deep	into	his	opponent’s	right	shoulder.	Khusrau	was	no	longer	looking	so
confident.	World	Shaker’s	victory	couldn’t	be	long	delayed,	Salim	thought,	but	as	the	maddened	elephants
closed	again	Damudar’s	driver	lunged	forward	with	his	metal	pole.	He	looked	as	if	he	intended	to	strike
his	elephant	but	suddenly,	grabbing	hold	of	a	leather	strap	round	Damudar’s	neck,	he	leaned	right	out	and
with	 a	 quick	 movement	 hooked	 the	 curved	 end	 of	 his	 rod	 round	 Suraj’s	 leg.	 Pulled	 off	 balance,	 Suraj
teetered	for	a	moment	then	fell,	arms	flailing,	to	the	ground.	From	where	he	was	standing	Salim	couldn’t
quite	see	what	had	happened	to	him	but	he	heard	the	shocked	gasp	that	a	moment	or	two	later	rose	up	from
the	crowd.
‘Stop	the	fight!’	Akbar	ordered.
Within	moments,	attendants	were	throwing	lit	fire	crackers	into	the	enclosure	to	frighten	the	elephants
and	drive	them	apart.	The	noisy,	fizzing,	smoking	devices	were	too	much	for	Damudar	who,	with	his	two
riders	 still	 clinging	 to	 his	 neck,	 stampeded	 and	 burst	 right	 through	 the	 wall	 of	 earth-filled	 sacks.
Trampling	three	spectators	who	were	not	quick	enough	to	leap	out	of	the	way,	the	terrified	animal	bolted
along	 the	 riverbank,	 scattering	 further	 onlookers	 as	 he	 ran,	 and	 then,	 swerving,	 plunged	 into	 the	 Jumna
where	he	came	to	a	halt	nearly	in	midstream,	staining	the	water	red	with	his	blood.
Meanwhile	Basu	had	slid	forward	to	take	Suraj’s	place	on	World	Shaker	and	had	managed,	despite	the
noise	and	the	chaos,	to	soothe	the	elephant	and	even	to	slip	a	cotton	blindfold	over	his	eyes	to	quieten	him
further.	In	the	very	middle	of	the	enclosure	lay	the	mangled	heap	that	had	been	Suraj.	His	head	had	been
crushed	to	a	bloody	pulp	by	an	elephant’s	foot	and	his	intestines	were	spilled	on	the	ground.	Salim	turned
to	his	eldest	son,	shouting,	‘Your	driver	realised	my	elephant	was	about	to	win	so	he	cheated	by	attacking
my	mahout,	causing	the	needless	death	of	a	brave	man.’
‘What	happened	was	an	accident.’	Khusrau’s	face	was	flushed	and	his	eyes	avoided	Salim’s.
‘You	know	that’s	not	true.	Since	your	elephant	fled	the	arena,	in	the	name	of	my	dead	driver	I	claim	the
victory.’

‘There	 was	 no	 victor.	 It	 was	 a	 draw.	 Grandfather	 .	 .	 .’	 Khusrau	 turned	 to	 appeal	 to	 Akbar	 but	 the
emperor	 wasn’t	 attending	 to	 them.	 He	 was	 on	 his	 feet,	 supported	 by	 an	 attendant	 on	 either	 side,	 and
peering	intently	over	the	edge	of	the	balcony.	Wondering	what	was	claiming	his	father’s	attention,	Salim
stepped	 forward	 as	 well.	 The	 crowds	 below	 were	 milling	 around,	 craning	 to	 watch	 what	 remained	 of
Suraj	being	gathered	from	the	ground	and	carried	away	on	a	rough	stretcher	to	await	his	Rajput	funeral
rites.	But	then	Salim	heard	angry	shouting	and	saw	that	scuffles	were	breaking	out	between	his	men	and
Khusrau’s.	As	he	watched,	one	of	Khusrau’s	attendants	pulled	a	dagger	from	his	belt	and	slashed	one	of
his	own	retainers	across	the	face	with	it.	Immediately	more	men	piled	into	the	fray	on	both	sides,	fists	and
weapons	flying.	Nearby,	another	group	of	his	followers	were	struggling	with	some	of	Khusrau’s	men	in
the	shallows	of	the	river,	throwing	punches	and	attempting	to	push	each	other’s	heads	beneath	the	water.
‘Salim.	Khusrau.	How	dare	your	men	brawl	like	this	in	front	of	me!	Have	you	no	authority	over	them?
You	should	both	be	ashamed.’	Akbar	was	shaking	with	fury.	‘Khurram,	it	seems	that	you	are	the	only	one	I
can	trust.	Go	to	the	captain	of	the	guard	and	order	him	to	stop	this	outrage	at	once.	Any	man	who	drew	a
weapon	on	another	is	to	be	arrested	and	flogged.’
‘Yes,	Grandfather,’	said	Khurram,	running	to	obey.
‘As	for	you,	Salim	and	Khusrau,	go.	The	sight	of	you	wearies	me.’	Akbar	sat	down	again	and	passed	a
hand	over	his	eyes.
Khusrau	 hurried	 away	 but	 Salim	 hesitated.	 He	 wanted	 to	 justify	 himself	 but	 there	 was	 no	 point.
Whatever	 he	 said	 or	 did	 would	 only	 confirm	 his	 father’s	 opinion	 of	 him.	 With	 a	 backward	 glance	 at
Akbar,	 who	 gave	 him	 no	 encouragement	 to	 remain,	 Salim	 walked	 slowly	 from	 the	 balcony.	 At	 least
Khusrau	had	incurred	an	equal	share	of	Akbar’s	displeasure,	he	consoled	himself,	but	then	another	thought
struck	him.	What	was	it	that	Akbar	had	said	to	Khurram?	‘You	are	the	only	one	I	can	trust	.	.	.’
Perhaps	those	words	carried	a	deeper	meaning	than	either	he	or	Khusrau	realised.	What	would	Akbar
say	to	the	boy	about	the	day’s	events	when	they	were	alone?	That	the	naked	rivalry	between	Salim	and
Khusrau	showed	that	neither	was	fit	to	rule?

Chapter	29

Seizer	of	the	World

y	 qorchi	 woke	 me	 with	 the	 news	 that	 my	 father	 has	 been	 taken	 ill.	 What	 is	 wrong?’	 Salim	 asked
early	one	morning	in	October	1605.
‘His	 Majesty	 was	 seized	 with	 violent	 stomach	 cramps	 about	 three	 hours	 ago	 and	 then	 began
vomiting,’	 said	 Akbar’s	 chief	 hakim,	 an	 elderly,	 dignified-looking	 man	 dressed	 almost	 entirely	 in	 grey
named	 Ahmed	 Malik.	 Lowering	 his	 voice	 and	 glancing	 over	 his	 shoulder	 at	 the	 guards	 on	 duty	 outside
Akbar’s	bedchamber,	the	doctor	added,	‘My	first	thought	was	that	he	had	been	poisoned.’
‘Poisoned?	That’s	impossible.	Everything	my	father	eats	is	tasted	three	times	and	each	dish	sealed	by
the	mir	bahawal,	the	master	of	the	kitchen,	and	escorted	to	his	table	by	guards	.	.	.	even	the	Ganges	water
he	is	so	fond	of	is	checked	again	and	again.’
‘Ways	 can	 always	 be	 found.	 Remember	 how	 your	 great-grandfather	 nearly	 died	 at	 the	 hands	 of	 a
poisoner	 here	 in	 Agra.	 It	 was	 my	 grandfather	 Abdul-Malik	 who	 treated	 him.	 But	 I	 now	 believe	 my
suspicions	were	groundless.	I	ordered	some	of	the	vomit	to	be	fed	at	once	to	pariah	dogs	but	not	one	has
shown	 any	 ill	 effects.	 Also,	 your	 father’s	 symptoms	 are	 not	 developing	 as	 they	 would	 if	 he	 had	 been
poisoned.’
‘What	is	it	then?	The	same	stomach	illness	that	afflicted	him	a	few	months	ago?’
‘Very	probably,	though	I	can’t	be	sure	yet.	Whatever	the	malady	is,	it	is	racking	your	father	with	great
virulence.	 My	 colleagues	 and	 I	 are	 doing	 everything	 we	 can	 to	 discover	 the	 cause,	 I	 promise	 you,
Highness.’
‘I	am	sure	you	are.	May	I	see	the	emperor?’
‘He	is	in	great	pain	and	has	asked	not	to	be	disturbed.’
‘Can’t	you	relieve	his	suffering?’
‘Of	course.	I	offered	him	opium	but	he	refused	it.	He	says	there	are	important	issues	he	must	decide	and
that	to	do	so	he	must	keep	his	mind	absolutely	clear,	even	if	it	costs	him	pain.’
Salim’s	eyes	widened	as	he	took	in	the	significance	of	the	doctor’s	words.	There	was	only	one	reason
why	Akbar	would	have	said	such	a	thing	–	the	choice	of	successor.	He	must	think	he	was	dying	.	.	.
‘Hakim,	I	know	how	much	faith	my	father	has	in	you.	Save	him.’
‘I	will	do	my	best,	Highness,	but	I	must	be	honest.	He	is	weaker	than	I	have	ever	seen	him.	His	pulse	is
faint	 and	 ragged,	 and	 I	 suspect	 he	 has	 been	 suffering	 far	 longer	 and	 far	 more	 than	 he	 admits	 from	 his
stomach	problems.	Only	the	severity	of	tonight’s	attack	induced	him	to	summon	me.’
‘Hakim	.	.	.’	Salim	began;	then,	hearing	footsteps,	broke	off.	Khusrau	was	running	down	the	corridor
towards	them.
‘I	have	just	heard	the	news.	How	is	my	grandfather?’	Khusrau’s	flushed	face	looked	to	Salim’s	cynical
eyes	more	excited	than	anxious.
‘He	 is	 gravely	 ill,’	 he	 replied	 shortly.	 ‘Ahmed	 Malik	 will	 tell	 you	 the	 details.	 But	 don’t	 let	 your
questions	detain	him	too	long	from	your	grandfather’s	bedside.’
He	walked	slowly	away	down	the	dimly	lit	corridor	as	he	tried	to	collect	his	thoughts.	A	few	torches

‘M

still	burned	in	their	sconces	but	as	he	looked	through	an	open	casement	a	pale	band	of	light	on	the	horizon
showed	dawn	was	near.	Turning	a	corner,	he	saw	Suleiman	Beg	waiting	for	him.
‘Well?’	his	milk-brother	asked.
Salim	slowly	shook	his	head.	‘I	think	the	hakim	believes	my	father	is	dying,	though	he	didn’t	use	those
words.	So,	I	think,	does	my	father.	But	it	seems	incredible.	I’ve	thought	about	his	death	so	many	times	–	of
what	it	would	mean	for	my	future.	But	I	never	believed	the	moment	would	come,	never	mind	considered
how	I’d	feel.’
Suleiman	 Beg	 stepped	 closer	 and	 put	 his	 hands	 on	 Salim’s	 shoulders.	 ‘You	 must	 push	 your	 feelings
aside,	 complex	 as	 I’m	 sure	 they	 must	 be.	 News	 of	 the	 emperor’s	 illness	 is	 already	 spreading	 and
Khusrau’s	men	are	swaggering	about	the	Agra	fort	as	if	they	already	own	it.	The	talk	everywhere	is	about
who	the	emperor	will	name	as	his	heir.’
‘That’s	for	my	father	to	decide.’
‘Of	course.	But	none	of	us	can	predict	what’s	going	to	happen.	Forgive	me,	but	the	emperor	might	die
before	he	has	a	chance	to	choose	a	successor	.	.	.	and	even	if	he	nominates	you,	Khusrau’s	men	may	rise	in
rebellion.	You	must	prepare.	The	stronger	you	are,	the	quicker	you	can	strike	if	you	have	to.’
‘You’re	a	good	friend	to	me	and	are	right	as	always,	Suleiman	Beg.	What	do	you	suggest	I	do?’
‘Let	me	summon	those	commanders	we	know	to	be	loyal	to	you	to	the	capital	with	their	troops.’
‘Very	well.	But	tell	them	to	come	quietly,	without	ostentation.	I	must	do	nothing	to	provoke	suspicion	or
indeed	cause	anxiety	to	my	father.’
Akbar’s	face	looked	wan	and	his	hands	lay	claw-like	on	the	green	silk	coverlet	as	his	attendants	gently	set
down	the	chair	on	which	they	had	carried	him	from	his	apartments	to	his	private	audience	chamber.	It	was
two	days	since	he	had	fallen	ill	again	and	the	hakims	had	still	been	unable	to	prevent	him	from	passing
and	 vomiting	 blood,	 although	 there	 had	 been	 some	 reduction	 in	 its	 frequency,	 probably	 because	 he	 had
taken	no	nourishment.	No	wonder	his	skin	looked	almost	transparent.	It	was	hard	to	believe	the	frail	old
man	before	them	had	once	run	jubilantly	round	the	battlements	of	the	Agra	fort,	a	youth	clutched	beneath
each	muscular	arm.
Akbar’s	attendants	were	arranging	a	bolster	behind	his	back.	Salim	saw	his	father	wince	with	pain	but
after	 taking	 a	 moment	 to	 master	 himself	 the	 emperor	 began	 to	 speak.	 ‘I	 asked	 you	 here,	 my	 loyal
counsellors	–	my	ichkis	as	my	father	and	grandfather	would	have	called	you	–	to	help	me	take	perhaps	the
most	important	decision	of	my	reign.’	Akbar’s	voice	was	low	but	authoritative	as	ever.	‘My	illness	is	no
secret.	I	will	probably	die	soon.	That	is	unimportant.	What	matters	is	that	I	leave	my	empire	–	the	Moghul
empire	 –	 in	 safe	 hands.’	 Salim	 noticed	 Khusrau,	 resplendent	 in	 his	 favourite	 silver	 and	 purple,	 edge	 a
little	further	forward	at	his	grandfather’s	words.
‘I	would	have	made	my	decision	long	ago	but	I	wasn’t	sure	whether	to	chose	my	eldest	son	Salim	or	my
eldest	grandson	Khusrau.	Convinced	I	still	had	more	years	to	live,	I	decided	to	wait	and	to	observe	them
both	before	judging	which	is	better	fitted	to	rule.	But	I	no	longer	have	the	luxury	of	time.	The	choice	will
be	mine	alone,	but	before	I	make	it	I	wish	to	hear	your	views.	You	are	my	advisers.	Speak.’
Salim	caught	his	breath.	In	the	next	few	minutes,	the	course	of	his	future	life	would	be	decided.	Shaikh
Salim	Chishti’s	words	echoed	in	his	brain	–	‘You	will	be	emperor’	–	but	much	had	happened	since	that
warm	dark	night	when	he	had	run	out	of	the	palace	of	Fatehpur	Sikri	to	ask	for	the	Sufi’s	help.	Despite	his
efforts	he	had	never	fully	won	his	father’s	admiration	–	or	even	his	attention	for	long	–	and	had	allowed
desperation	and	ambition	to	lure	him	into	rash	acts.	He	was	sure	Akbar	had	never	forgiven	Abul	Fazl’s
murder	even	if	they	were	now	formally	reconciled.

Man	Singh	of	Amber,	Khusrau’s	maternal	uncle,	stepped	forward.	‘Majesty,	you	ask	our	views	and	I
will	give	you	mine.	I	favour	Prince	Khusrau.	He	is	young,	with	many	years	still	ahead	of	him.	Much	as	I
respect	my	brother-in-law	Prince	Salim,	he	is	approaching	his	middle	years.	He	should	advise	and	guide
his	son,	not	sit	upon	the	throne	himself.’	As	he	finished,	Man	Singh	gave	a	little	shake	of	his	head	as	if
what	he	had	just	said	weighed	heavily	upon	him	and	had	not	been	easy.	What	hypocrisy,	thought	Salim.	It
was	obviously	in	Man	Singh’s	interests	for	his	nephew	to	become	the	new	emperor.
‘I	 agree,’	 said	 Aziz	 Koka,	 one	 of	 Akbar’s	 youngest	 commanders.	 Salim’s	 lip	 curled.	 It	 was	 common
knowledge	 that	 Khusrau	 had	 promised	 to	 make	 him	 his	 khan-i-khanan	 when	 he	 became	 emperor.	 ‘We
need	a	young	and	vigorous	leader	to	take	us	to	yet	further	glories,’	the	man	added	portentously.
Silence	fell	in	the	chamber	and	Salim	saw	the	courtiers	exchange	glances.	Then	Hassan	Amal,	whose
father	had	ridden	as	a	youth	with	Babur	from	Kabul	stepped	forward.
‘No!’	Although	he	must	have	been	at	least	ten	years	older	than	Akbar,	his	voice	was	firm	and	resolute.
‘Many	times	in	our	history	brother	has	challenged	brother	for	the	throne,	but	it	has	never	been	the	way	of
the	old	Moghul	clans	to	set	aside	the	father	in	favour	of	the	son.	The	natural	–	indeed	the	only	–	successor
to	 our	 great	 emperor	 must	 be	 Prince	 Salim.	 I	 believe	 I	 speak	 not	 only	 for	 myself	 but	 for	 many	 others
gathered	 here	 who	 have	 been	 worried	 by	 the	 recent	 rivalry	 between	 the	 factions	 supporting	 the	 two
princes.	It	is	unseemly	and	it	is	dangerous.	I	am	old	enough	to	remember	the	days	before	we	were	secure
in	 Hindustan	 –	 when	 our	 future	 here	 hung	 in	 the	 balance.	 Today	 we	 are	 undisputed	 masters	 of	 a	 great
empire	 and	 must	 not	 put	 that	 at	 risk	 by	 breaking	 with	 custom.	 Justice	 and	 prudence	 demand	 that	 Prince
Salim,	the	Emperor	Akbar’s	eldest	and	only	surviving	son,	succeeds	to	the	throne.	Like	all	of	us	he	has
made	mistakes,	but	equally,	experience	has	taught	him	many	lessons.	He	will,	I	am	sure,	make	a	worthy
emperor.’
‘That	 would	 be	 my	 view	 too,	 as	 your	 khan-i-khanan,’	 said	 Abdul	 Rahman	 gently.	 All	 around	 heads
were	nodding	in	agreement	but	Salim,	watching	his	father’s	face	for	a	sign,	could	tell	nothing.	Akbar’s
eyes	were	half	closed	and	for	a	moment	he	was	afraid	his	father	was	losing	consciousness.	But	then	the
emperor	raised	a	hand.
‘Hassan	 Amal	 and	 Abdul	 Rahman,	 I	 am	 grateful	 to	 you	 both	 for	 your	 wisdom,	 as	 I	 have	 been	 many
times	 before.	 I	 can	 see	 your	 words	 have	 the	 support	 of	 the	 majority	 present.	 They	 confirm	 what	 was
already	in	my	heart.	My	attendants	have	brought	the	imperial	turban	and	robes	from	my	apartments.’
Salim	tensed	involuntarily	and	forced	himself	to	remain	calm	and	look	at	his	father	as	Akbar	continued,
‘All	that	needs	to	be	done	is	to	summon	the	mullahs.	I	wish	them	to	witness	that	I	choose	Prince	Salim	as
my	heir.’
As	all	eyes	turned	to	him,	massive	relief	overcame	Salim.	He	would	rule	and	fulfil	his	destiny.	His	face
suffused	with	joy	but	with	tears	welling	in	his	eyes,	he	said,	‘Thank	you,	Father.	I	will	be	worthy	of	your
trust.	When	the	time	comes	I	will	need	the	support	of	all	and	I	will	rule	for	all.’
Twenty	minutes	later,	before	the	council	and	the	ulama,	Abdul	Rahman	placed	the	imperial	green	silk
turban	on	Salim’s	head,	while	Hassan	Amal	draped	the	imperial	robes	over	his	shoulders.	Akbar	looked
at	his	son	for	a	few	moments	then	said,	‘Before	all	of	you	gathered	here,	I	declare	my	son	Salim	the	next
Moghul	emperor	after	my	death	and	I	command	your	obedience	to	him	in	all	things	whatever	your	own
preference	may	have	been.	Let	me	hear	you	swear	your	oaths.’
Throughout	 the	 chamber,	 voice	 after	 voice	 responded,	 pledging	 allegiance	 to	 Salim.	 Not	 even	 Aziz
Koka	held	back.
‘There	is	one	last	thing	left	for	me	to	do.’	Akbar	reached	beneath	the	folds	of	his	coverlet	and	with	a
shaking	 hand	 brought	 out	 a	 jewelled,	 eagle-hilted	 sword.	 ‘This	 is	 Alamgir,	 the	 sword	 with	 which	 my
grandfather	Babur	extinguished	his	enemies	and	conquered	an	empire.	Many	times	it	saved	my	own	life

and	brought	me	victory.	Salim,	I	give	it	into	your	hands.	Be	worthy	of	all	it	represents.’
As	 Salim	 knelt	 by	 his	 father’s	 side	 to	 take	 the	 sword,	 the	 eagle’s	 ruby	 eyes	 glittered.	 Shaikh	 Salim
Chishti	had	spoken	no	more	than	the	truth.	He	would	be	emperor.	His	destiny	was	in	his	own	hands	at	last.
A	few	hours	later,	Akbar’s	hakim	Ahmed	Malik	came	to	Salim’s	apartments.	His	expression	was	grave.
‘Your	father’s	condition	has	worsened	again.	However,	he	remains	clear-minded.	When	he	asked	us	how
much	of	life	was	left	to	him,	we	had	to	tell	him	that	none	of	us,	his	doctors,	could	say	but	that	he	could	not
survive	long.	It	might	be	days	but	perhaps	only	hours.	He	said	nothing	for	a	minute	or	two.	Then	he	calmly
thanked	 us	 for	 our	 honesty	 and	 for	 all	 we	 had	 done	 and	 were	 doing	 to	 make	 him	 comfortable,	 and
requested	us	to	bring	you	to	him	again.’
‘I	will	come	at	once,’	said	Salim,	putting	aside	the	newly	completed	painting	of	a	nilgai	deer	he	had
commissioned	from	one	of	the	court	artists.	He	still	retained	his	deep	interest	in	nature	and	had	asked	the
artist	to	take	particular	care	to	reproduce	the	muscle	structure	so	he	could	study	it.	Only	a	few	minutes
later	he	had	crossed	the	sunlit	courtyard,	oblivious	of	the	beauty	of	the	fountains	bubbling	in	the	marble
water	channels	at	its	centre,	and	one	of	the	bodyguards	outside	his	father’s	sickroom	was	pulling	aside	the
fine	muslin	curtains	so	he	could	go	in.	Neither	the	scent	of	the	sandalwood	and	camphor	burning	in	the
incense	 holders	 nor	 the	 constant	 attentions	 of	 Akbar’s	 faithful	 servants	 could	 quite	 disguise	 the	 pungent
sour	smell	that	was	the	inevitable	consequence	of	the	decay	of	Akbar’s	intestines.
The	emperor	was	propped	up	against	some	brocade	cushions.	To	his	son,	Akbar’s	pale	face	with	its
purple	bags	beneath	the	eyes	remained	composed	as	he	took	a	sip	of	water	held	to	his	lips	by	an	attendant
and	then	said,	‘Come	and	sit	by	me,	Salim.	My	voice	is	weakening	and	I	want	you	to	hear	my	words.’
Obediently,	Salim	sat	down	by	his	father’s	side.	As	he	did	so	Akbar	continued,	‘Ahmed	Malik	has	told
me	that	I	will	soon	leave	this	world.’
‘I	pray	that	will	not	be	the	case	just	yet,’	said	Salim,	realising	as	he	spoke	that	there	was	truth	behind
his	conventional	words.	Now	that	the	crown	he	had	craved	for	so	long	was	nearly	his,	he	felt	the	same
apprehension	as	he	had	through	much	of	his	life.	How	could	he	measure	up	to	his	father’s	achievements?
Quietly	he	added,	‘But	if	you	are	to	die,	you	do	so	happy	and	confident	in	your	immense	achievements.’
‘One	of	the	European	priests	once	told	me	that	a	philosopher	born	centuries	before	the	foundation	of
their	Christian	faith	defined	the	essence	of	tragedy	as	being	that	no	man	could	be	called	truly	happy	until
he	had	died	in	peace.	I	have	long	seen	the	truth	in	these	words	as	I	have	strived	to	arrange	the	affairs	of
our	empire	for	the	future	so	that	my	work	should	be	built	on	and	not	dissipated	after	I	die.	Now	that	my
death	is	near	it	would	help	me	die	in	peace	if	you	would	truly	listen	to	some	parting	advice	from	me.’
‘Gladly.	Over	these	last	hours	since	you	formally	appointed	me	as	your	successor	I	have	appreciated
the	enormity	of	the	responsibility	soon	to	fall	on	me.	I	would	welcome	it.’
‘First,	 remember	 never	 to	 let	 the	 empire	 stagnate.	 If	 it	 does	 not	 grow	 and	 change	 by	 responding	 to
events	it	can	only	decline.’
‘I	understand.	I	will	continue	the	campaign	in	the	Deccan.	Our	borders	to	north,	east	and	west	rest	on
rivers	and	mountains.	The	south	provides	the	greatest	opportunity	for	expansion.’
‘Second,	always	be	alert	for	rebellion.’	Salim	thought	for	a	moment	that	Akbar	was	still	reproaching
him,	 but	 there	 was	 no	 hint	 of	 that	 in	 Akbar’s	 face	 as	 he	 continued,	 ‘One	 of	 my	 historians	 tells	 me	 I’ve
overcome	more	than	one	hundred	and	forty	rebellions	during	my	reign.	They	break	out	when	armies	have
no	prospect	of	campaigns	or	booty	to	distract	them	from	plotting.’
Salim	nodded.
‘Be	tolerant	to	all,	whatever	their	position	or	religion,	and	be	merciful	whenever	you	can.	It	will	help

unite	 our	 subjects.	 But	 when	 your	 mercy	 is	 misinterpreted	 or	 the	 crime	 heinous,	 act	 decisively	 and
ruthlessly	so	that	all	may	know	your	power.	Avoid	the	mistakes	of	my	father	Humayun.	It	is	better	a	few
die	early	as	an	example	than	many	later.’
‘I	will	try	not	to	lash	out	but	to	react	firmly	and	with	thought,’	Salim	replied	almost	mechanically.	What
his	father	was	saying	was	obvious	and	certainly	not	new.	Perhaps	Akbar	was	congratulating	himself	as	he
reviewed	 his	 life	 rather	 than	 truly	 seeking	 to	 help	 him.	 But	 then,	 as	 if	 reading	 Salim’s	 thoughts,	 Akbar
said,	‘Now	for	knowledge	I	have	gleaned	the	hard	way	from	my	mistakes.’
Salim	started.	It	was	the	first	time	he	had	heard	his	father	admit	any	but	the	most	trivial	mistakes.
‘Pay	attention	to	your	family.	Our	dynasty	is	now	so	much	stronger	than	any	potential	external	rival	that
the	greatest	threat	to	our	power	must	come	from	dissension	among	ourselves.	My	father	indulged	his	halfbrothers	too	much.	I	wanted	to	show	that	power	could	not	be	shared	and	that	my	authority	was	absolute.	I
still	 believe	 that	 is	 true	 –	 that	 only	 one	 man	 can	 rule	 at	 a	 time.	 However,	 when	 you	 and	 your	 brothers
grew,	I	expected	you	to	develop	my	attributes	and	share	my	attitudes	while	unquestioningly	obeying	my
instructions.	I	did	not	understand	that	the	two	were	scarcely	compatible.	It	would	never	have	been	in	my
own	nature	not	to	raise	questions	or	to	seek	independent	command	if	my	own	father	had	lived.’
Salim	saw	Akbar	wince,	whether	through	the	pain	in	his	abdomen	or	the	recollection	of	his	behaviour,
and	 said,	 ‘I	 will	 try	 to	 make	 allowances	 for	 the	 ambitions	 of	 my	 sons,	 but	 I	 have	 already	 begun	 to
understand	how	difficult	it	is.’
‘I’ve	 not	 helped	 by	 unsettling	 you	 all,	 by	 constantly	 testing	 which	 of	 you	 might	 be	 the	 most	 suitable
successor.	But	even	had	I	not,	the	longer	I	have	lived	the	more	clearly	I	have	realised	that	the	relationship
between	parents	and	children	is	an	unequal	one.	The	parent	concentrates	his	future	hopes	as	well	as	his
love	on	the	child	and	hence	scrutinises	and	guides	him	closely.	The	child	resents	the	burden	and	longs	to
strike	 out	 independently.	 He	 sees	 all	 his	 failings,	 faults	 and	 frustrations	 as	 due	 to	 his	 parents	 and	 his
virtues	 and	 successes	 as	 solely	 his	 own	 creation.	 He	 believes	 he	 can	 do	 better	 than	 the	 parent	 if	 only
given	a	chance.’
‘I	see	that	more	clearly	now,’	Salim	acknowledged,	‘now	that	my	sons	are	growing	older.	But	I	also	felt
in	 awe	 of	 you	 and	 your	 great	 and	 unique	 achievements.	 It	 made	 me	 awkward	 and	 surly	 around	 you.	 It
should	 not	 have.’	 He	 paused,	 but	 then	 after	 a	 moment	 continued	 quietly,	 ‘I	 am	 truly	 sorry	 for	 the	 pain	 I
gave	you.’
‘And	I	for	that	I	inflicted	on	you.	But	I	now	beg	only	this	of	you.	Learn	from	the	past	but	look	to	the
future.’	 As	 he	 spoke,	 Akbar	 extended	 his	 dry	 hand	 towards	 his	 eldest	 son.	 Salim	 silently	 took	 it	 in	 his
own,	feeling	closer	to	his	father	than	he	had	done	since	his	early	childhood,	united	with	him	in	their	hopes
for	the	dynasty.
To	the	slow	beating	of	kettledrums	Salim	mounted	the	steps	of	the	marble	dais	to	the	throne	that	awaited
him	in	the	Hall	of	Public	Audience	in	the	Agra	fort.	On	his	finger	was	Timur’s	ring	bearing	the	emblem	of
the	tiger	that	he	had	taken	gently	from	his	dead	father’s	hand	nine	days	ago	and	placed	upon	his	own.	The
eagle-hilted	Alamgir	hung	by	his	side	and	round	his	neck	was	a	triple	string	of	uncut	emeralds	intertwined
with	pearls	that	had	once	belonged	to	his	great-grandfather	Babur.	A	sense	of	continuity	with	a	heroic	past
filled	 Salim	 with	 pride.	 It	 was	 as	 if	 his	 ancestors	 were	 here	 among	 the	 ranks	 of	 his	 nobles	 and
commanders,	watching	him	claim	the	throne	they	had	fought	so	hard	for	and	urging	him	on	to	fresh	glories.
Turning,	Salim	sat	down	on	the	green	brocade	cushions	and	rested	his	bejewelled	hands	on	the	throne’s
golden	arms.	‘I	have	observed	nine	days	of	mourning	for	my	respected	father,	whose	body	now	lies	in	his
favourite	gardens	in	Sikandra	where	I	will	construct	his	tomb	with	all	the	magnificence	due	to	him.	The

khutba	was	read	in	my	name	on	Friday	in	the	mosques	and	the	time	has	come	for	me	to	present	myself	to
you	as	your	new	emperor.’
Salim	 paused	 and	 surveyed	 the	 rows	 of	 men	 before	 him	 as	 he	 had	 so	 often	 seen	 his	 father	 do.	 The
world	seemed	a	different	place	from	here.	The	fate	not	only	of	those	present	but	of	million	upon	million	of
his	subjects	rested	in	his	hands.	It	was	an	awesome,	almost	godlike	responsibility,	but	also	inspiring,	and
he	sat	up	yet	straighter	on	his	throne.	As	he	did	so,	his	eyes	met	those	of	Suleiman	Beg,	standing	beside
the	tall	figure	of	Abdul	Rahman,	and	the	faint	curve	of	his	milk-brother’s	mouth	told	him	he	understood
exactly	how	he	was	feeling.
Salim	looked	down	at	his	sons,	positioned	just	below	the	dais	to	his	right.	Eighteen-year-old	Khusrau,
splendid	in	a	purple	silk	tunic	and	with	diamonds	flashing	in	his	turban,	was	standing	beside	the	thirteenyear-old	 Khurram,	 whose	 pinched	 face	 showed	 the	 marks	 of	 his	 continuing	 grief	 at	 the	 death	 of	 the
grandfather	who	had	meant	so	much	to	him.	Sixteen-year-old	Parvez	was	just	behind	them.	They	were	all
of	them	fine	youths	but	it	was	Khusrau	on	whom	Salim’s	gaze	lingered	longest.	He	must	forgive	Khusrau
his	rash	ambition	and	find	ways	to	reconcile	this	mettlesome	son.	There	must	be	a	way	to	create	a	bond
with	 him	 and	 so	 break	 the	 cycle	 of	 frustrated	 ambition,	 envy	 and	 uncertainty	 that	 had	 blighted	 his	 own
happiness	and	his	relationship	with	his	father.
Dragging	 his	 mind	 back	 to	 the	 present,	 Salim	 continued	 his	 address.	 ‘I	 have	 chosen	 a	 new	 name	 by
which	I	wish	to	be	known	as	your	emperor.	It	is	Jahangir,	‘Seizer	of	the	World’.	I	have	taken	it	because
the	 business	 of	 kings	 is	 seizing	 their	 destiny	 and	 controlling	 the	 world.	 My	 father	 has	 left	 me	 a	 mighty
empire.	With	your	help,	my	loyal	subjects,	I	pledge	to	make	it	mightier	still.’
He	rose	to	his	feet	and	spread	his	arms,	as	if	taking	every	man	in	the	room	into	his	embrace.	All	around
the	pillared	hall	rose	cries	of	‘Long	life	to	Jahangir!’	Such	sweet	music	to	his	ears.
‘Leave	me,’	Jahangir	ordered	his	treasurer	and	the	attendants	who	had	accompanied	him	down	the	long
flight	of	stone	steps	to	the	iron-bound	wooden	door	leading	into	the	treasure	chamber	concealed	beneath
one	of	the	stables	in	the	Agra	fort.
‘Are	you	sure,	Majesty?	It	is	very	dark	inside	the	chamber	until	the	lamps	are	lit	and	the	ground	is	dank
and	slippery.’
‘Give	me	your	key	and	leave	me	a	torch,	but	I	wish	to	be	alone	here.’
The	treasurer	handed	over	an	intricate	iron	key	on	a	leather	thong	while	a	servant	passed	Jahangir	his
burning	torch	of	rags	dipped	in	oil.	Jahangir	waited	until	the	footsteps	had	receded	back	up	the	staircase
and	he	was	indeed	alone	in	this	dank,	earthy-smelling	place.	He	could	still	scarcely	believe	the	extent	of
his	wealth.	The	lists	of	imperial	jewels	that	his	treasurer	had	prepared	for	him	amounted	to	nearly	three
hundred	and	fifty	pounds	in	weight	of	diamonds,	pearls,	rubies	and	emeralds	alone.	‘Over	six	hundred	and
twenty-five	 thousand	 carats	 of	 the	 most	 precious	 gems,	 Majesty,’	 the	 man	 had	 pointed	 out,	 running	 his
practised	finger	down	the	columns,	‘and	semi-precious	gems	too	numerous	to	count,	never	mind	all	the
gold	and	silver	coin.’
It	was	childish	of	him,	but	Jahangir	had	hardly	been	able	to	contain	his	eagerness	to	visit	one	of	his
treasure	houses.	He	turned	the	key	in	the	solid,	well-oiled	lock,	pushed	the	heavy	wooden	door	open	and,
holding	the	torch	high	in	his	left	hand,	peered	inside.
The	chamber	was	very	dark	but	as	Jahangir	entered	something	glimmered	in	the	purple	shadows.	He
held	 the	 torch	 yet	 higher	 and	 on	 the	 wall	 to	 the	 left	 of	 the	 door	 noticed	 a	 double	 row	 of	 arched	 niches
where	oil	lamps	had	been	placed.	He	lit	the	lamps	from	the	torch,	thrust	the	torch	in	a	sconce,	then	looked
around	him.	The	chamber	was	larger	than	he’d	anticipated	–	some	thirty	feet	long	–	and	the	ceiling	was

supported	by	two	handsome	carved	sandstone	pillars	in	the	middle.
But	 what	 caught	 his	 attention	 were	 four	 giant	 domed	 caskets	 on	 trestles	 against	 the	 back	 wall.
Advancing	slowly,	he	opened	the	lid	of	the	first	to	find	a	mound	of	blood-red	rubies	as	big	as	duck	eggs.
He	took	a	handful	and	stared	at	them.	How	magnificent	they	were	–	the	queen	of	gems.	For	a	moment,	he
saw	Mehrunissa’s	face	as	she	had	dropped	her	veil.	Rubies	would	suit	her	and	now	he	was	emperor	he
could	give	jewels	to	whoever	he	chose	.	.	.	indeed	choose	anyone	for	his	wife	.	.	.	Tipping	them	back	in,
he	closed	the	lid	and	moved	on.	The	next	box	contained	dark	green	emeralds	in	all	shapes	and	sizes,	some
cut,	some	uncut.	The	third	box	held	sapphires	and	diamonds	from	the	world’s	only	mine	in	Golconda	in
the	Deccan,	while	the	fourth	was	filled	with	loose	pearls.	Plunging	in	his	arms	up	to	his	elbows,	Jahangir
felt	their	lustrous	coolness	against	his	skin.
To	the	right	of	the	trestles,	Jahangir	saw	open	sacks	of	corals,	topazes,	turquoises,	amethysts	and	other
semi-precious	stones	heaped	casually	on	the	ground.	Even	just	these	would	be	enough	to	finance	an	army
for	a	year	.	.	.	Suddenly	he	was	laughing	aloud.	This	treasure	house	held	just	a	tiny	fraction	of	his	wealth	–
it	 was	 nothing	 compared	 with	 those	 in	 Delhi	 or	 Lahore,	 the	 treasurer	 had	 assured	 him.	 Still	 laughing,
Jahangir	 seized	 a	 sack	 and	 tipped	 its	 contents	 on	 the	 floor,	 then	 another,	 then	 another,	 mingling	 the
different	coloured	gems	promiscuously.	Then	when	he	had	accumulated	a	great	pile	he	flung	himself	down
on	them,	rolling	from	side	to	side.	He	was	emperor	now.	A	Hindu	sage	had	written	that	nothing	was	more
disappointing	than	achieving	your	heart’s	desire.	Well,	he	was	wrong.	Jahangir	flung	a	fistful	of	gems	into
the	air	and	watched	them	flash	like	fireflies	in	the	lamplight.
An	hour	later,	Jahangir	emerged	blinking	into	the	bright	April	sunlight,	still	as	light-headed	as	if	he’d
been	 drinking	 wine	 or	 taking	 opium,	 but	 the	 sight	 of	 Suleiman	 Beg’s	 anxious	 face	 drove	 all	 frivolous
feelings	from	him.
‘What	is	it?’
‘Treason,	Majesty.’
‘What	do	you	mean?	Who	would	dare	.	.	.?’
‘Your	eldest	son.	As	you	know,	three	days	ago	Prince	Khusrau	rode	out	of	the	Agra	fort.’
‘I	know.	He	told	me	he	was	going	to	spend	some	time	at	Sikandra	superintending	the	construction	of	my
father’s	tomb.	I	gave	him	instructions	for	the	builders.’
‘He	was	lying.	He	never	meant	to	go	to	Sikandra.	He’s	riding	north	for	Lahore,	rendezvousing	with	his
supporters	as	he	goes	and	bribing	new	ones	to	join	him.	He	must	have	planned	this	weeks	ago.	Aziz	Koka
is	with	him.	The	reason	I	know	all	this	is	that	Aziz	Koka	tried	to	induce	your	brother-in-law	Man	Singh	to
join	the	rebels	but	he	had	the	sense	to	refuse	and	to	bring	me	word	of	the	plot.’
Jahangir	 was	 barely	 listening	 as	 his	 mind	 raced.	 ‘We	 can	 overtake	 them.	 Have	 a	 detachment	 of	 my
fastest	 cavalry	 prepared.	 I	 myself	 will	 lead	 them.	 I	 have	 waited	 so	 long	 for	 what	 is	 mine	 that	 I’ll	 let
nobody	seize	it	from	me.	Those	who	defy	me	will	pay	in	blood,	whoever	they	are	.	.	.’

Historical	Note

hen	 people	 talk	 about	 ‘the	 Great	 Moghul’	 it’s	 usually	 Akbar	 they	 mean.	 He	 was	 the	 first	 Moghul
emperor	 to	 be	 born	 in	 Hindustan.	 During	 his	 long	 and	 successful	 reign	 he	 created	 an	 empire	 of
almost	 unimaginable	 opulence	 which	 covered	 two-thirds	 of	 the	 Indian	 sub-continent	 and	 had	 a	 hundred
million	ethnically	and	religiously	diverse	subjects.	By	the	end	of	his	reign	he	had	almost	trebled	the	size
of	the	empire	bequeathed	to	him	by	his	father	Humayun.
Modesty	 was	 seldom	 a	 Moghul	 trait	 and	 to	 ensure	 future	 generations	 appreciated	 his	 achievements
Akbar	employed	court	chroniclers.	Of	their	works,	Abul	Fazl’s	Akbarnama	and	Ain-i-Akbari	 –	 together
amounting	 to	 nearly	 four	 thousand	 pages	 in	 English	 translation	 –	 are	 outstanding	 sources	 for	 Akbar’s
reign.	 Despite	 his	 florid	 style	 and	 hagiographic	 language,	 Abul	 Fazl	 conveys	 Akbar’s	 charisma	 and	 the
glamour	of	his	court.	He	is	also	meticulous,	telling	us	not	only	how	the	emperor	defeated	his	enemies	and
administered	 his	 empire	 but	 also	 the	 price	 the	 court	 paid	 for	 everyday	 commodities	 and	 the	 detailed
arrangements	 for	 cooking,	 for	 food	 tasting	 and	 for	 the	 haram.	 After	 Abul	 Fazl’s	 murder	 in	 1602,	 Asad
Beg,	 who	 had	 assisted	 him,	 took	 over	 and	 documented	 the	 final	 years	 of	 Akbar’s	 life	 in	 his	 Wikaya.
Badauni,	 one	 of	 Akbar’s	 critics,	 also	 described	 the	 emperor	 and	 his	 court	 in	 Muntakhab	 al-Tawarikh,
written	in	secret	towards	the	end	of	Akbar’s	life.
Akbar’s	reign	was	also	the	time	when	growing	numbers	of	Europeans	–	merchants,	priests	and	soldiers
of	fortune	–	began	making	their	way	to	the	Moghul	court.	Father	Antonio	Monserrate	was	one	of	the	first
Jesuits	to	visit	Akbar’s	court	and	his	Commentary	on	his	Journey	to	the	Court	of	Akbar	 describes	 the
religious	debates	in	Akbar’s	ibadat	khana.	In	1584,	Ralph	Fitch	was	among	the	first	English	merchants	to
reach	Hindustan	and	he	describes	the	wonders	of	Agra	and	Fatehpur	Sikri	in	his	Memoirs.
Vivid	and	personal	as	many	of	these	accounts	are,	I	also	wanted	to	visit	–	actually	in	most	cases	revisit
–	 the	 places	 that	 were	 important	 to	 Akbar.	 In	 Delhi	 I	 sat	 in	 the	 walled	 garden	 and	 watched	 the	 sun	 set
behind	 the	 domed	 sandstone	 and	 marble	 tomb	 Akbar	 built	 for	 his	 father	 Humayun,	 with	 its	 elegant
symmetry	and	chamfered	corners	such	an	obvious	forerunner	to	the	luminous	Taj	Mahal.	In	Agra,	I	walked
in	burning	heat	up	the	steep,	twisting	ramp	through	gates	studded	with	spikes	to	repel	charges	by	armoured
elephants	into	the	sandstone	fortress	remodelled	by	Akbar.	It	is	still	encircled	by	the	battlements	around
which	he	ran	with	a	man	clenched	under	each	arm	to	show	off	his	strength.	Standing	on	a	jharoka	balcony
I	imagined	how	Akbar	must	have	felt	as	he	showed	himself	every	dawn	to	the	subjects	clustering	on	the
sandy	riverbanks	below.
Perhaps	 the	 greatest	 pointer	 to	 the	 boundless	 scope	 of	 Akbar’s	 ambition	 and	 confidence	 is	 the
sandstone	city	of	Fatehpur	Sikri	near	Agra,	built	and	then	abandoned	by	Akbar	a	few	years	later.	Wander
its	courtyards,	palaces	and	pavilions	and	you’re	surprised	not	to	see	ghosts.	Bright	blue	tiles	from	Isfahan
still	glitter	on	the	roof	of	Akbar’s	immense	haram	above	the	palace	of	the	winds	where	Akbar’s	women
sat	to	catch	the	cooling	breezes.	The	marble	platform	where	he	sat	beneath	silken	canopies	is	still	there	in
the	centre	of	the	Anup	Talao,	Akbar’s	‘Peerless	Pool’.	The	hot,	dry	desert	air	has	preserved	the	intricate
sandstone	 carvings	 while	 in	 the	 courtyard	 of	 the	 mosque	 people	 still	 pray	 at	 Shaikh	 Salim	 Chishti’s
domed	white	marble	tomb	inlaid	with	mother	of	pearl	and	tie	twists	of	thread	to	its	delicate	jali	 screens
as	physical	expressions	of	their	innermost	wishes.
In	Rajasthan,	the	soaring	fortress-palaces	of	Amber	and	Jodhpur	explain	Akbar’s	eagerness	to	make	the

W

proud	and	martial	Rajputs	his	allies,	while	the	ruins	of	the	once	great	Rajput	fortress	of	Chittorgarh	show
the	 consequences	 of	 refusing	 Akbar’s	 overtures.	 I	 climbed	 up	 to	 it	 from	 the	 east	 –	 the	 direction	 from
which	Akbar’s	armies	made	their	assaults.	In	a	courtyard,	a	stone	marks	the	place	where,	knowing	that
defeat	by	the	Moghuls	was	inevitable,	the	Rajput	women	committed	jauhar,	hurling	themselves	into	the
flames	 of	 a	 great	 fire	 rather	 than	 fall	 into	 Moghul	 hands.	 It	 was	 a	 reminder	 that	 for	 all	 his	 manifold
achievements,	religious	toleration	and	advanced,	sophisticated	view	of	the	world,	Akbar	lived	in	and	was
part	of	a	violent	time	and	that	while	those	who	accepted	Moghul	rule	prospered,	those	who	resisted	were
crushed.
As	with	all	the	books	in	the	Moghul	Quintet,	the	main	military,	political	and	personal	events	described
in	Ruler	of	the	World	all	happened.	Akbar	was	indeed	crowned	on	a	hastily	constructed	brick	throne	after
his	 mother	 and	 Bairam	 Khan	 concealed	 the	 death	 of	 his	 father	 Humayun	 to	 buy	 time;	 Adham	 Khan,
Akbar’s	milk-brother,	did	attempt	to	kill	him	in	the	haram;	Akbar’s	defeat	of	Hemu	and	his	subsequent
military	 campaigns	 in	 Rajasthan,	 Gujarat,	 Bengal,	 Kashmir,	 Sind	 and	 the	 Deccan	 all	 occurred;	 Akbar’s
many	marriages	and	his	hundreds	of	concubines	are	also	based	on	fact	though	the	names	of	some	of	his
wives	 are	 unknown.	 Akbar’s	 life	 was	 so	 rich	 in	 incident	 that	 I	 of	 course	 omitted	 some	 events	 and
condensed	 or	 simplified	 others	 as	 well	 as	 compressing	 timescales	 in	 a	 book	 which	 covers	 a	 fifty-year
period.	 Also	 because	 the	 chronicles	 cannot	 tell	 us	 everything	 –	 their	 writers	 would	 never	 have	 dared
reveal	 certain	 things	 –	 I	 have	 used	 the	 novelist’s	 freedom	 to	 imagine	 some	 incidents	 and	 of	 course	 to
attribute	motivation.
However,	all	the	time	I	have	tried	to	be	true	to	Akbar	who,	as	I	wrote	the	book,	became	very	real	to
me.	I	was	moved	by	the	dilemma	of	a	man,	outwardly	so	successful	and	beloved	by	his	subjects,	whose
relationships	 with	 those	 closest	 to	 him	 often	 failed.	 Nearly	 all	 the	 other	 main	 characters	 are	 real	 too	 –
Akbar’s	mother	and	aunt	Hamida	and	Gulbadan,	his	milk-mother	Maham	Anga	and	milk-brother	Adham
Khan,	his	Persian	regent	Bairam	Khan,	his	adversaries	like	Hemu,	Shah	Daud	and	Rana	Udai	Singh,	his
sons	 Salim,	 Murad	 and	 Daniyal	 and	 the	 Sufi	 divine	 Salim	 Chishti	 who	 predicted	 their	 birth,	 and	 his
grandsons,	 the	 Persian	 Ghiyas	 Beg	 and	 his	 family,	 the	 Jesuit	 fathers	 Antonio	 Monserrate	 and	 Francisco
Henriquez	and	the	mullahs	Shaikh	Mubarak	and	Shaikh	Ahmad.	A	few	like	Ahmed	Khan,	Akbar’s	khan-ikhanan,	and	Salim’s	confidant	Suleiman	Beg	are	composite	characters.

Additional	Notes

Frontispiece
The	 quotation	 from	 the	 Akbarnama	 comes	 from	 H.	 Beveridge’s	 translation	 (vol.	 I,	 p.631,	 Calcutta:
Asiatic	Society	1907-39)
Chapter	1
Akbar’s	illiteracy	is	well	attested.	He	may	have	been	dyslexic.
Humayun	died	in	January	1556.	Akbar,	who	was	born	on	15	October	1542,	was	proclaimed	emperor	on
his	brick	throne	in	February	1556.
Timur,	a	chieftain	of	the	nomadic	Barlas	Turks,	is	better	known	in	the	west	as	Tamburlaine,	a	corruption
of	‘Timur	the	Lame’.	Christopher	Marlowe’s	play	portrays	him	as	‘the	scourge	of	God’.
Of	 course	 Akbar	 would	 have	 used	 the	 Muslim	 lunar	 calendar,	 but	 I	 have	 converted	 dates	 into	 the
conventional	solar,	Christian,	calendar	we	use	in	the	west.
Chapter	2
The	battle	of	Panipat	against	Hemu	took	place	in	November	1556.
Chapter	3
Bairam	Khan	was	dismissed	in	1560.
Chapter	4
Bairam	Khan	was	killed	in	early	1561.
Chapter	5
Adham	 Khan	 killed	 Atga	 Khan	 and	 attempted	 to	 kill	 Akbar	 in	 May	 1562.	 Maham	 Anga	 died	 soon
afterwards,	 it	 is	 said	 from	 grief.	 Akbar	 provided	 the	 money	 for	 a	 handsome	 tomb	 for	 them.	 It	 still
stands	at	Mehrauli,	south	of	Delhi	near	the	Qtab	Minar.
Chapter	7
The	Chittorgarh	campaign	took	place	in	1567-8.
Chapter	8
Although	Akbar	certainly	married	a	Rajput	princess	of	Amber	(Jaipur)	she	was	not	his	first	wife	and	the
chroniclers	are	not	entirely	clear	on	her	name	and	give	no	details	of	the	nature	of	her	relationship	with
Akbar	other	than	that	she	was	Salim’s	mother.	Their	relationship	has	been	fictionalised	in	various	ways
in	 films	 and	 novels.	 It	 is	 my	 own	 thought	 that	 she	 might	 have	 been	 hostile	 to	 Akbar	 because	 of	 his
subjection	of	the	Rajputs.
Chapter	9

Akbar	visited	Shaikh	Salim	Chishti	in	1568	and	Salim	was	born	on	30	August	1569.	The	word	sufi	means
‘those	 who	 wear	 rough	 woollen	 garments’	 and	 derives	 from	 the	 Arabic	 word	 for	 wool	 –	 suf.	 Sufi
mystics	adopted	such	garb	as	a	symbol	of	aestheticism	and	poverty.
Chapter	10
Abul	Fazl	was	born	in	January	1551	and	entered	Akbar’s	service	in	1574.
Akbar’s	use	of	‘tens’	in	designating	his	officials	as	commanders	of	a	certain	number	of	troops	was	based
on	zero,	an	Indian	invention.	It	was	brought	to	Europe	via	the	Middle	East.	Hence	what	we	know	as
Arabic	numerals	are	really	Indian	numerals.
Europeans	wrote	of	how	Akbar	ordered	sections	of	buildings	to	be	prefabricated	and	himself	laboured	in
the	quarries	cuting	sandstone.
The	uses	of	individual	buildings	at	Fatehpur	Sikri	are	not	recorded	by	Abul	Fazl	or	any	other	chroniclers
in	 detail	 and	 are	 a	 fertile	 subject	 of	 debate	 among	 architectural	 historians,	 despite	 the	 certainty	 with
which	guides	speak	of	them.
Chapter	11
The	Gujarat	campaign	was	in	1572.
Chapter	12
The	Patna	campaign	and	the	invasion	of	Bengal	began	in	1574.	Shah	Daud’s	death	was	in	1576.
Chapter	13
Murad	was	born	in	June	1570,	Daniyal	in	September	1572.
The	distinction	between	Shia	and	Sunni	derived	from	the	first	century	of	Islam	and	originally	related	to
who	 was	 Muhammad’s	 legitimate	 successor	 and	 whether	 the	 office	 should	 be	 an	 elected	 one	 or
restricted,	as	the	Shias	claimed,	to	the	descendants	of	the	prophet	through	his	cousin	and	son-in-law,
Ali.	‘Shia’	is	the	word	for	‘party’	and	comes	from	the	phrase	‘the	party	of	Ali’.	‘Sunni’	means	‘those
who	 follow	 the	 custom	 –	 sunna	 –	 of	 Muhammad’.	 By	 the	 sixteenth	 century	 further	 differences	 had
grown	between	the	two	sects,	such	as	the	nature	of	required	daily	prayer.
The	first	Jesuit	mission	including	Father	Monserrate,	a	Spaniard,	arrived	at	Akbar’s	court	in	1580.
Chapter	14
Chronicles	 record	 the	 story	 of	 Ghiyas	 Beg’s	 hazardous	 journey	 during	 which	 in	 1577	 Mehrunissa	 was
born.
Chapter	16
John	Newberry	arrived	in	India	with	Ralph	Fitch	in	1584.
Some	 commentators	 have	 suggested	 that	 Akbar’s	 trances,	 of	 which	 this	 was	 by	 no	 means	 the	 only	 one,
were	because,	like	Julius	Caesar,	he	suffered	from	epilepsy.
Chapter	18
Many	reasons	have	been	advanced	for	the	abandonment	of	Fatehpur	Sikri.	Lack	of	water	is	one.	Another
is	the	distance	from	the	Jumna,	a	main	transport	artery	at	the	time.	Yet	another	is	that	Akbar	moved	his
capital	to	Lahore	simply	to	be	nearer	the	front	lines	of	his	campaigns.

The	invasion	of	Kashmir	was	in	1586.
Chapter	19
The	campaign	in	Sind	was	from	1588-91.
Salim	married	Man	Bai	in	1585.
Khusrau	was	born	in	August	1587.
Chapter	21
Khurram	 was	 born	 on	 5	 January	 1592	 in	 Lahore.	 Parvez	 was	 born	 in	 1589.	 Abul	 Fazl	 wrote	 in	 the
Akbarnama	that	Akbar	‘loved	grandsons	more	than	sons’.	Akbar	did	indeed	take	Khurram	into	his	own
household,	placing	him	with	one	of	his	wives,	Rukhiya.
Chapter	22
The	Kandahar	campaign	culminated	in	the	city’s	fall	in	May	1595.
Chapter	23
The	 story	 of	 Salim’s	 seduction	 of	 Akbar’s	 concubine	 Anarkali	 was	 first	 mentioned	 by	 another	 English
merchant	William	Finch	who	visited	Hindustan	between	1608	and	1611	and	claimed	while	in	Lahore	to
have	seen	a	sumptuous	tomb	erected	for	Anarkali	by	Salim	after	he	became	emperor.	Though	there	is	no
other	contemporary	evidence	for	this	tragic	romance,	the	story	of	Anarkali	was	clearly	part	of	the	oral
tradition	and	was	taken	up	by	later	Moghul	writers.	It	is	my	own	invention	that	she	was	Venetian.
Chapter	26
Salim	indeed	turned	to	wine,	spirits	and	opium.	His	hands	shook	so	badly	he	couldn’t	hold	a	glass	and
court	physicians	gave	him	six	months	to	live	unless	he	reformed.
Chapter	27
Salim	left	for	Allahabad	in	July	1600.	In	his	own	memoirs	the	Jahangirnama,	Salim	describes	Abul	Fazl
as	‘no	friend	of	mine’	and	admitted	responsibility	for	his	killing.
Murad	died	of	drink	in	May	1599.
Salim	returned	to	Agra	in	April	1603.
Chapter	28
Hamida	died	in	August	1604	and	Daniyal	in	March	1605.
Chapter	29
The	western	philosopher	spoken	of	by	Akbar	is	Sophocles.
Akbar	 died	 on	 15	 October	 1605.	 According	 to	 the	 western	 calendar	 it	 was	 his	 sixty-third	 birthday.
Intriguingly	 one	 of	 his	 most	 famous	 contemporaries	 William	 Shakespeare	 also	 died	 on	 his	 own
birthday,	23	April	1616,	at	the	age	of	fifty-two.

