The Bourne Legacy
Eric Van Lustbader
Robert Ludlum

Prologue
Khalid Murat, leader of the Chechen rebels, sat still as a stone in the center vehicle of
the convoy making its way through the bombed-out streets of Grozny. The BTR-60BP
armored personnel carriers were standard Russian military issue and, as such, the convoy
was indistinguishable from all the others rumbling through the city on patrol. Murat's
heavily armed men were crammed into the other two vehicles—one in front and one
behind his own. They were heading toward Hospital Number Nine, one of six or seven
different hideouts Murat used to keep three steps ahead of the Russian forces searching
for him.
Murat was darkly bearded, close to fifty, with a bear's broad stance and the fire-lit eyes
of the true zealot. He had learned early on that the iron fist was the only way to rule. He
had been present when Jokhar Dudayev had imposed Islamic Shariah law to no avail. He
had seen the carnage wreaked when it had all begun, when the Chechnya-based warlords,
foreign associates of Osama bin Laden, invaded Daghestan and executed a string of
bombings in Moscow and Volgodonsk that killed some two hundred people. When the
blame for the foreigners' actions was falsely put on Chechen terrorists, the Russians
began their devastating bombing of Grozny, reducing much of the city to rubble.
The sky over the Chechen capital was blurred, made indistinct by a constant flux of ash
and cinder, a shimmering incandescence so lurid it seemed almost radioactive. Oil-fueled
fires burned everywhere across the rubble-strewn landscape.
Khalid Murat stared out the tinted windows as the convoy passed a burned-out
skeleton of a building, massive, hulking, the roofless interior filled with flickering flames.
He grunted, turned to Hasan Arsenov, his second in command, and said, "Once Grozny
was the beloved home to lovers strolling down the wide tree-lined boulevards, mothers
pushing prams across the leafy squares. The great circus was nightly filled to overflowing
with joyous, laughing faces, and architects the world over made their pilgrimage to tour
the magnificent buildings that once made Grozny one of the most beautiful cities on
earth."
He shook his head sadly, slapped the other's knee in a comradely gesture. "Allah,
Hasan!" he cried. "Look how the Russians have crushed everything that was good and
fine!"
Hasan Arsenov nodded. He was a brisk, energetic man fully ten years Murat's junior. A
former biathlon champion, he had the wide shoulders and narrow hips of a natural athlete.
When Murat had taken over as rebel leader, he was at his side. Now he pointed out to
Murat the charred husk of a building on the convoy's right. "Before the wars," he said
with grave intent, "when Grozny was still a major oil-refining center, my father worked
there at the Oil Institute. Now instead of profits from our wells, we get flash fires that
pollute our air and our water."

The two rebels were chastened into silence by the parade of bombed-out buildings they
passed, the streets empty save for scavengers, both human and animal. After several
minutes, they turned to each other, the pain of their people's suffering in their eyes. Murat
opened his mouth to speak but froze at the unmistakable sound of bullets pinging against
their vehicle. It took him but an instant to realize that the vehicle was being hit by smallarms fire too weak to penetrate their vehicle's sturdy armor plate. Arsenov, ever vigilant,
reached for the radio.
"I'm going to order the guards in the lead and tail vehicles to return fire."
Murat shook his head. "No, Hasan. Think. We're camouflaged in Russian military
uniforms, riding in Russian personnel carriers. Whoever is firing on us is more likely an
ally than a foe. We need to make sure before there's innocent blood on our hands."
He took the radio from Arsenov, ordered the convoy to a halt.
"Lieutenant Gochiyayev," he said into the radio, "organize your men into a recon. I
want to find out who's shooting at us, but I don't want them killed."
In the lead vehicle, Lieutenant Gochiyayev gathered his men and ordered them to fan
out behind the cover of the armored convoy. He followed them onto the rubble-strewn
street, hunching his shoulders against the bitter cold. Using precise hand signals, he
directed his men to converge from the left and right onto the place from which the smallarms fire had come.
His men were well trained; they moved swiftly and silently from rock to wall to pile of
twisted metal beams, scrunched down, presenting as small a target as possible. However,
no more shots were heard. They made their final run at once, a pincer move, designed to
trap the enemy and crush them in a blistering cross-fire.
In the center vehicle, Hasan Arsenov kept his eye on the place where Gochiyayev had
converged the troops and waited for the sounds of gunfire that never came. Instead, the
head and shoulders of Lieutenant Gochiyayev appeared in the distance. Facing the center
vehicle, he waved his arm back and forth in an arc, signaling that the area had been
secured. At this sign, Khalid Murat moved past Arsenov, stepped out of the personnel
carrier and without hesitation walked through the frozen rubble toward his men.
"Khalid Murat!" Arsenov called in alarm, running after his leader.
Clearly unperturbed, Murat walked toward a low crumbling stone wall, the place
where the gunfire had emanated. He caught a glimpse of the piles of garbage; on one was
a waxy white-skinned corpse that had some time ago been stripped of its clothes. Even at
a distance the stench of putrefaction was like being hit with a poleax. Arsenov caught up
with him and drew his sidearm.
When Murat reached the wall, his men were on either side, their arms at the ready. The
wind gusted fitfully, howling and whining through the ruins. The dull metallic sky had
darkened further and it began to snow. A light dusting quickly coated Murat's boots,
created a web in the wiry jumble of his beard.
"Lieutenant Gochiyayev, you've found the attackers?"
"I have, sir."
"Allah has guided me in all things; he guides me in this. Let me see them."
"There's only one," Gochiyayev replied.

"One?" Arsenov cried. "Who? Did he know we're Chechen?"
"You're Chechen?" a small voice said. A pallid face emerged from behind the wall, a
boy not more than ten years old. He wore a filthy wool hat, threadbare sweater over a few
thin plaid shirts, patched trousers and a pair of cracked rubber boots far too big for his
feet, which had probably been taken off a dead man. Though only a child, he had the eyes
of an adult; they watched everything with a combination of wariness and mistrust. He
stood protecting the skeleton of an unexploded Russian rocket he had scavenged for
bread money, likely all that stood between his family and starvation. He held a gun in his
left hand; his right arm ended at the wrist. Murat immediately looked away but Arsenov
continued to stare.
"A land mine," the boy said with a heartbreaking matter-of-factness. "Laid by the
Russian scum."
"Allah be praised! What a little soldier!" Murat exclaimed, directing his dazzling,
disarming smile at the boy. It was this smile that had drawn his people to him like filings
to a magnet. "Come, come." He beckoned, then held his empty palms up. "As you can see,
we're Chechen, like you."
"If you're like me," the boy said, "why do you ride in Russian armored cars?"
"What better way to hide from the Russian wolf, eh?" Murat squinted, laughed to see
that the boy held a Gyurza. "You carry a Russian Special Forces gun. Such bravery must
be rewarded, yes?"
Murat knelt next to the boy and asked his name. When the boy told him, he said,
"Aznor, do you know who I am? I am Khalid Murat and I, too, wish to be free of the
Russian yoke. Together we can do this, yes?"
"I never meant to shoot at fellow Chechens," Aznor said. With his mutilated arm, he
pointed to the convoy. "I thought this was a zachistka" He meant the monstrous clean-up
operations perpetrated by Russian soldiers who searched for suspected rebels. More than
twelve thousand Chechens had been killed during the zachistkas; two thousand had
simply disappeared, countless others injured, tortured, maimed and raped. "The Russians
murdered my father, my uncles. If you were Russians I would've killed you all." A spasm
of rage and frustration played across his face.
"I believe you would've," Murat said solemnly. He dug in his pocket for some bills.
The boy had to tuck the gun into his waistband in order to take them in his remaining
hand. Leaning toward the boy, Murat said in a collusive whisper, "Now listen to me—I'll
tell you where to buy more ammunition for your Gyurza so you'll be prepared when the
next zachistka comes."
"Thank you." Aznor's face cracked open in a smile Khalid Murat whispered a few
words, then stepped back and ruffled the boy's hair. "Allah be with you, little soldier, in
everything you do."
The Chechen leader and his second in command watched the small boy as he
clambered back over the rubble, pieces of an unexploded Russian rocket tucked under
one arm. Then they returned to their vehicle. With a grunt of disgust, Hasan slammed
shut the armor-plated door on the world outside, Aznor's world. "Doesn't it bother you
that you're sending a child to his death?"

Murat glanced at him. The snow had melted to trembling droplets on his beard, making
him seem in Arsenov's eyes more like a liturgical imam than a military commander. "I've
given this child—who must feed and clothe and, most important, protect the rest of his
family as if he were an adult—I have given him hope, a specific objective. In short, I've
provided him with a reason to live."
Bitterness had turned Arsenov's face hard and pale; his eyes had a baleful look.
"Russian bullets will tear him to ribbons."
"Is that what you truly think, Hasan? That Aznor is stupid or, worse, careless?"
"He's but one child."
"When the seed is planted, the shoots will rise out of even the most inhospitable
ground. It's always been this way, Hasan. The belief and courage of one inevitably grows
and spreads, and soon that one is ten, twenty, a hundred, a thousand!"
"And all the while our people are being murdered, raped, beaten, starved and penned
like cattle. It's not enough, Khalid. Not nearly enough!"
"The impatience of youth hasn't yet left you, Hasan." He gripped the other's shoulder.
"Well, I shouldn't be surprised, yes?"
Arsenov, catching the look of pity in Murat's eyes, clenched his jaw and turned his face
away. Curls of snow made visible wind devils along the street, whirling like Chechen
dervishes in ecstatic trance. Murat took this as a sign of the import of what he had just
done, of what he was about to say. "Have faith," he said in hushed, sacramental tones, "in
Allah and in that courageous boy."
Ten minutes later, the convoy stopped in front of Hospital Number Nine. Arsenov
looked at his wristwatch. "Almost time," he said. The two of them were riding in the
same vehicle, against standard security precautions, owing to the extreme importance of
the call they were about to receive.
Murat leaned over, pressed a button, and the soundproof barrier rose into place, cutting
them off from the driver and four bodyguards sitting forward. Well-trained, they stared
straight ahead through the bullet-proof windshield.
"Tell me, Khalid, as the moment of truth is upon us, what reservations you have."
Murat raised his bristling eyebrows in a display of incomprehension that Arsenov
thought rather transparent. "Reservations?"
"Don't you want what's rightfully ours, Khalid, what Allah decrees we should have?"
"The blood runs high in you, my friend. I know this only too well. We've fought side
by side many times—we've killed together and we owe each other our very lives, yes?
Now, listen to me. I bleed for our people. Their pain fills me with a rage I can barely
contain. You know this better, perhaps, than anyone. But history warns that one should
beware what one wants the most. The consequences of what's being proposed—" "What
we've been planning for!"
"Yes, planning for," Khalid Murat said. "But the consequences must be considered."
"Caution," Arsenov said bitterly. "Always caution." "My friend." Khalid Murat smiled
as he gripped the other's shoulder. "I don't want to be misled. The reckless foe is easiest
to destroy. You must learn to make patience a virtue."

"Patience!" Arsenov spat. "You didn't tell the boy back there to be patient. You gave
him money, told him where to buy ammunition. You set him against the Russians. Each
day we delay is another day that boy and thousands like him risk being killed. It's the
very future of Chechnya that will be decided by our choice here."
Murat pressed his thumbs into his eyes, rubbing with a circular motion. "There are
other ways, Hasan. There are always other ways. Perhaps we should consider—"
"There's no time. The announcement has been made, the date set. The Shaykh is right."
"The Shaykh, yes." Khalid Murat shook his head. "Always the Shaykh." At that
moment, the car phone rang. Khalid Murat glanced at his trusted companion and calmly
clicked on the speakerphone. "Yes, Shaykh," he said in a deferential tone of voice.
"Hasan and I are both here. We await your instructions."
High above the street where the convoy was idling, a figure crouched on a flat rooftop,
elbows atop the low parapet. Lying along the parapet was a Finnish Sako TRG-41 boltaction sniper rifle, one of many he had modified himself. Its aluminum and polyurethane
stock made it as light as it was deadly accurate. He was dressed in the camouflage
uniform of the Russian military, which did not look out of place with the Asian caste of
his smooth features. Over the uniform, he wore a lightweight Kevlar harness from which
hung a metal loop. In his right palm, he cradled a small matte-black box, no larger than
the size of a pack of cigarettes. It was a wireless device in which were set two buttons.
There was a stillness about him, a kind of aura that intimidated people. It was as if he
understood silence, could gather it to him, manipulate it, unleash it as a weapon.
In his black eyes grew the world entire, and the street, the buildings upon which he
now gazed were nothing more than a stage set. He counted the Chechen soldiers as they
emerged from the guard vehicles. There were eighteen: the drivers still behind the wheels
and in the center vehicle at least four guards as well as the principals.
As the rebels entered the main entrance of the hospital on their way to secure the site,
he depressed the top button of the wireless remote and C4 charges went off, collapsing
the hospital entrance. The percussion shook the street, set the heavy vehicles to rocking
on their oversized shocks. The rebels caught directly in the blast were either blown to bits
or crushed beneath the weight of falling rubble, but he knew that at least some of the
rebels could have been far enough inside the hospital lobby to have survived, a possibility
he had factored into his plan.
With the sound of the first explosion still ringing and the dust not yet settled, the figure
looked down at the wireless device in his hand and depressed the lower button. The street
in front and back of the convoy erupted in a deafening blast, collapsing the shell-pocked
macadam.
Now, even as the men below struggled to come to grips with the carnage he had visited
upon them, the assassin took up the Sako, moving with a methodical, unhurried precision.
The rifle was loaded with special non-fragmentation bullets of the smallest caliber the
rifle could accommodate. Through its IR-enabled scope, he saw three rebels who had
managed to escape the blasts with only minor injuries. They were running toward the
middle vehicle, screaming at the occupants to get out before it was destroyed by another
blast. He watched as they yanked open the right-hand doors, allowed Hasan Arsenov and
one guard to emerge. That left the driver and three remaining bodyguards inside the car

with Khalid Murat. As Arsenov turned away, the figure sighted on his head. Through the
scope, he noted the expression of command plastered on Arsenov's face. Then he moved
the barrel in a smooth, practiced motion, this time sighting on the Chechen's thigh. The
figure squeezed off a shot and Arsenov grabbed his left leg, shouting as he went down.
One of the guards ran to Arsenov, dragged him to cover. The two remaining guards,
swiftly determining where the shot had come from, ran across the street, entering the
building on whose roof the figure crouched.
As three more rebels appeared, racing out a side entrance to the hospital, the assassin
dropped the Sako. He watched now as the vehicle containing Khalid Murat slammed into
reverse. Behind and below him, he could hear the rebels pounding up the stairs leading to
his rooftop perch. Still unhurried, he fitted titanium and corundum spikes to his boots.
Then he took up a composite crossbow and shot a line into a light pole just behind the
middle vehicle, tying off the line to make sure it was taut. Shouting voices reached him.
The rebels had gained the floor directly below him.
The front of the vehicle was now facing him as the driver tried to maneuver it around
the huge chunks of concrete, granite and macadam that had erupted in the explosion. The
assassin could see the soft glint of the two panes of glass that comprised the windshield.
That was the one problem the Russians had yet to overcome: Bullet-proofing the glass
made the panes so heavy it required two of them for the windshield. The personnel
carrier's one vulnerable spot was the strip of metal between the two panes.
He took the sturdy metal loop attached to his harness and snapped himself to the taut
line. Behind him, he heard the rebels burst through the door, emerging onto the roof a
hundred feet away. Spotting the assassin, they swung around to fire on him as they ran
toward him, setting off an unnoticed trip wire. Immediately, they were engulfed in a fiery
detonation from the last remaining packet of C4 the assassin had planted the night before.
Never turning around to acknowledge the carnage behind him, the assassin tested the
line and then launched himself from the rooftop. He slid down the line, lifting his legs so
that the spikes were aimed at the windshield divider. Everything now depended on the
speed and the angle with which he would strike the divider between the bullet-proof
panes of the windshield. If he was off by just a fraction, the divider would hold and he
had a good chance of breaking his leg.
The force of the impact ran up his legs, jolting his spine as the titanium and corundum
spikes on his boots crumpled the divider like a tin can, the panes of glass caving in
without its support. He crashed through the windshield and into the interior of the vehicle,
carrying with him much of the windshield. A chunk of it struck the driver in the neck,
half-severing his head. The assassin twisted to his left. The bodyguard in the front seat
was covered in the driver's blood. He was reaching for his gun when the assassin took his
head between his powerful hands and broke his neck before he had a chance to squeeze
off a round.
The other two bodyguards in the jumpseat just behind the driver fired wildly at the
assassin, who pushed the bodyguard with the broken neck so that his body absorbed the
bullets. From behind this makeshift protection, he used the bodyguard's gun, fired
precisely, one shot through the forehead of each man.
That left only Khalid Murat. The Chechen leader, his face a mask of hatred, had kicked
open the door and was shouting for his men. The assassin lunged at Murat, shaking the

huge man as if he were a water rat; Murat's jaws snapped at him, almost taking off an ear.
Calmly, methodically, almost joyously he seized Murat around the throat and, staring into
his eyes, jabbed his thumb into the cricoid cartilage of the Chechen leader's lower larynx.
Blood immediately filled Murat's throat, choking him, draining him of strength. His arms
flailed, his hands beating against the assassin's face and head. To no avail. Murat was
drowning in his own blood. His lungs filled and his breathing became ragged, thick. He
vomited blood and his eyes rolled up in their sockets.
Dropping the now-limp body, the assassin climbed back into the front seat, hurling the
driver's corpse out of the door. He slammed the vehicle into gear and stepped on the gas
before what remained of the rebels could react. The vehicle leaped forward like a
racehorse from the gate, hurtled over rubble and tarmac, then vanished into thin air as it
plummeted into the hole the explosives had made in the street.
Underground, the assassin upshifted, racing through the tight space of a storm drain
that had been widened by the Russians, who had intended to use them for clandestine
assaults on rebel strongholds. Sparks flew as the metal fenders now and again scraped
against the curving concrete walls. But for all that, he was safe. His plan had concluded
as it had begun: with perfect clockwork precision.
After midnight the noxious clouds rolled away, at last revealing the moon. The
detritus-laden atmosphere gave it a reddish glow, its lambent light intermittently
disturbed by the still burning fires.
Two men stood in the center of a steel bridge. Below them, the charred remains of an
unending war were reflected in the surface of the sluggish water.
"It's done," the first one said. "Khalid Murat has been killed in a manner that will cause
maximum impact."
"I would expect nothing less, Khan," the second man said. "You owe your impeccable
reputation in no small part to the commissions I've given you." He was taller than the
assassin by a good four inches, square-shouldered, long-legged. The only thing that
marred his appearance was the strange glassy utterly hairless skin on the left side of his
face and neck. He possessed the charisma of a born leader, a man not to be trifled with.
Clearly, he was at home in the great halls of power, in public forums or in thuggish back
alleys.
Khan was still basking in the look in Murat's eyes as he died. The look was different in
every man. Khan had learned there was no common thread, for each man's life was
unique, and though all sinned, the corrosion those sins caused differed from one to the
next, like the structure of a snowflake, never to be repeated. In Murat, what had it been?
Not fear. Astonishment, yes, rage, surely, but something more, deeper—sorrow at leaving
a life's work undone. The dissection of the last look was always incomplete, Khan
thought. He longed to know whether there was betrayal there, as well. Had Murat known
who had ordered his assassination?
He looked at Stepan Spalko, who was holding out an envelope, heavy with money.
"Your fee," Spalko said. "Plus a bonus."
"Bonus?" The topic of money refocused Khan's attention fully on the immediate.
"There was no mention of a bonus."

Spalko shrugged. The ruddy moonlight made his cheek and neck shine like a bloody
mass. "Khalid Murat was your twenty-fifth commission with me. Call it an anniversary
present, if you wish."
"You're most generous, Mr. Spalko." Khan stowed the envelope away without looking
inside. To have done otherwise would have been very bad manners.
"I've asked you to call me Stepan. I refer to you as Khan."
"That's different."
"How so?"
Khan stood very still, and the silence flowed toward him. It gathered in him, making
him seem taller, broader.
"I'm not required to explain myself to you, Mr. Spalko."
"Come, come," Spalko said with a conciliatory gesture. "We're far from strangers. We
share secrets of the most intimate nature."
The silence built. Somewhere on the outskirts of Grozny an explosion lit up the night,
and the sound of small-arms fire came to them like strings of children's firecrackers.
At length, Khan spoke. "In the jungle I learned two mortal lessons. The first was to
trust absolutely only myself. The second was to observe the most minute proprietaries of
civilization, because knowing your place in the world is the only thing standing between
you and the anarchy of the jungle."
Spalko regarded him for a long time. The fitful glow from the firefight was in Khan's
eyes, lending him a savage aspect. Spalko imagined him alone in the jungle, prey to
privations, the quarry of greed and wanton bloodlust. The jungle of Southeast Asia was a
world unto itself. A barbarous, pestilential area with its own peculiar laws. That Khan
had not only survived there, but flourished, was, in Spalko's mind at least, the essential
mystery surrounding him.
"I'd like to think we're more than businessman and client."
Khan shook his head. "Death has a particular odor. I smell it on you." "And I on you."
A slow smile crept across Spalko's face. "So you agree, there is something special
between us."
"We're men of secrets," Khan said, "aren't we?"
"A worship of death; a shared understanding of its power." Spalko nodded his assent.
"I have what you requested." He held out a black file folder.
Khan looked into Spalko's eyes for a moment. His discerning nature had caught a
certain air of condescension that he found inexcusable. As he had long ago learned to do,
he smiled at the offense, hiding his outrage behind the impenetrable mask of his face.
Another lesson he had learned in the jungle: Acting in the moment, in hot blood, often led
to an irreversible mistake; waiting in patience for the hot blood to cool was where all
successful vengeance was bred. Taking the folder, he busied himself with opening the
dossier. Inside, he found a single sheet of onionskin with three brief close-typed
paragraphs and a photo of a handsome male face. Beneath the picture was a name: David
Webb. "This is all of it?"
"Culled from many sources. All the information on him anyone has." Spalko spoke so
smoothly Khan was certain he had rehearsed the reply.

"But this is the man."
Spalko nodded.
"There can be no doubt."
"None whatsoever."
Judging by the widening glow, the firefight had intensified. Mortars could be heard,
bringing their rain of fire. Overhead, the moon seemed to glow a deeper red.
Khan's eyes narrowed and his right hand curled slowly into a tight fist of hate. "I could
never find a trace of him. I'd suspected he was dead."
"In a way," Spalko said, "he is."
He watched Khan walk across the bridge. He took out a cigarette and lit up, drawing
the smoke into his lungs, letting it go reluctantly. When Khan had disappeared into the
shadows, Spalko pulled out a cell phone, dialed an overseas number. A voice answered,
and Spalko said, "He has the dossier. Is everything in place?"
"Yes, sir."
"Good. At midnight your local time you'll begin the operation."

PART ONE

CHAPTER ONE
David Webb, professor of linguistics at Georgetown University, was buried beneath a
stack of ungraded term papers. He was striding down the musty back corridors of
gargantuan Healy Hall, heading for the office of Theodore Barton, his department head,
and he was late, hence this shortcut he had long ago discovered using narrow, ill-lighted
passageways few students knew about or cared to use.
There was a benign ebb and flow to his life bound by the strictures of the university.
His year was denned by the terms of the Georgetown semesters. The deep winter that
began them gave grudging way to a tentative spring and ended in the heat and humidity
of the second semester's finals week. There was a part of him that fought against serenity,
the part that thought of his former life in the clandestine service of the U.S. government,
the part that kept him friends with his former handler, Alexander Conklin.
He was about to round a corner when he heard harsh voices raised and mocking
laughter and saw ominous-seeming shadows playing along the wall.
"Muthfucka, we gonna make your gook tongue come out the back of your head!"
Bourne dropped the stack of papers he had been carrying and sprinted around the
corner. As he did so, he saw three young black men in coats down to their ankles arrayed
in a menacing semicircle around an Asian, trapping him against a corridor wall. They had

a way of standing, their knees slightly bent, their upper limbs loose and swinging slightly
that made their entire bodies seem like blunt and ugly aspects of weapons, cocked and
ready. With a start, he recognized their prey was Rongsey Siv, a favorite student of his.
"Muthafucka," snarled one, wiry, with a strung-out, reckless look on his defiant face,
"we come in here, gather up the goods to trade for the bling-bling."
"Can't ever have enough bling-bling," said another with an eagle tattoo on his cheek.
He rolled a huge gold square-cut ring, one of many on the fingers of his right hand, back
and forth. "Or don't you know the bling-bling, gook?"
"Yah, gook," the strung-out one said, goggle-eyed. "You don't look like you know
shit."
"He wants to stop us," the one with the tattooed cheek said, leaning in toward Rongsey.
"Yah, gook, whatcha gonna do, kung-fuckin-fu us to death?" They laughed raucously,
making stylized kicking gestures toward Rongsey, who shrank back even farther against
the wall as they closed in.
The third black man, thick-muscled, heavyset, drew a baseball bat from underneath the
voluminous folds of his long coat. "That right. Put your hands up, gook. We gonna break
your knuckles good." He slapped the bat against his cupped palm. "You want it all at
once or one at a time?"
"Yo," the strung-out one cried, "he don't get to choose." He pulled out his own baseball
bat and advanced menacingly on Rongsey.
As the strung-out kid brandished his bat, Webb came at them. So silent was his
approach, so intent were they on the damage they were about to inflict that they did not
become aware of him until he was upon them.
He grabbed the strung-out kid's bat in his left hand as it was coming down toward
Rongsey's head. Tattoo-cheek, on Webb's right, cursed mightily, swung his balled fist,
knuckles bristling with sharp-edged rings, aiming for Webb's ribs.
In that instant, from the veiled and shadowed place inside Webb's head, the Bourne
persona took firm control. Webb deflected the blow from tattoo-cheek with his biceps,
stepped forward and slammed his elbow into tattoo-cheek's sternum. He went down,
clawing at his chest.
The third thug, bigger than the other two, cursed and, dropping his bat, pulled a
switchblade. He lunged at Webb, who stepped into the attack, delivering a short, sharp
blow to the inside of the assailant's wrist. The switchblade fell to the corridor floor,
skittering away. Webb hooked his left foot behind the other's ankle and lifted up. The big
thug fell on his back, turned over and scrambled away.
Bourne yanked the baseball bat out of the strung-out thug's grip. "Muthafuckin' FiveO," the thug muttered. His pupils were dilated, unfocused by the effects of whatever
drugs he'd taken. He pulled a gun—a cheap Saturday-night special—and aimed it at
Webb.
With deadly accuracy, Webb flung the bat, striking the strung-out thug between the
eyes. He staggered back, crying out, and his gun went flying.
Alerted by the noise of the struggle, a pair of campus security guards appeared,
rounding the corner at a run. They brushed past Webb, pounding after the thugs, who fled
without a backward glance, the two helping the strung-out one. They burst through the

rear door to the building, out into the bright sunshine of the afternoon, with the guards hot
on their heels.
Despite the guards' intervention, Webb felt Bourne's desire to pursue the thugs run hot
in his body. How quickly it had risen from its psychic sleep, how easily it had gained
control of him. Was it because he wanted it to? Webb took a deep breath, gained a
semblance of control and turned to face Rongsey Siv.
"Professor Webb!" Rongsey tried to clear his throat. "I don't know—" He seemed
abruptly overcome. His large black eyes were wide behind the lenses of his glasses. His
expression was, as usual, impassive, but in those eyes Webb could see all the fear in the
world.
"It's okay now." Webb put his arm across Rongsey's shoulders. As always, his
fondness for the Cambodian refugee was showing through his professorial reserve. He
couldn't help it. Rongsey had overcome great adversity— losing almost all his family in
the war. Rongsey and Webb had been in the same Southeast Asian jungles, and try as he
might, Webb could not fully remove himself from the tangle of that hot, humid world.
Like a recurring fever, it never really left you. He felt a shiver of recognition, like a
dream one has while awake.
"Loak soksapbaee chea tay?" How are you? he asked in Khmer.
"I'm fine, Professor," Rongsey replied in the same language. "But I don't... I mean, how
did you ... ?"
"Why don't we go outside?" Webb suggested. He was now quite late for Barton's
meeting, but he couldn't care less. He picked up the switchblade and the gun. As he
checked the gun's mechanism, the firing pin broke. He threw the useless gun in a trash
bin but pocketed the switchblade.
Around the corner, Rongsey helped him with the spill of term papers. They then
walked in silence through the corridors, which became increasingly crowded as they
neared the front of the building. Webb recognized the special nature of this silence, the
dense weight of time returning to normal after an incident of shared violence. It was a
wartime thing, a consequence of the jungle; odd and unsettling that it should happen on
this teeming metropolitan campus.
Emerging from the corridor, they joined the swarm of students crowding through the
front doors to Healy Hall. Just inside, in the center of the floor, gleamed the hallowed
Georgetown University seal. A great majority of the students were walking around it
because a school legend held that if you walked on the seal you'd never graduate.
Rongsey was one of those who gave the seal a wide berth, but Webb strode right across it
with no qualms whatsoever.
Outside, they stood in the buttery spring sunlight, facing the trees and the Old
Quadrangle, breathing the air with its hint of budding flowers. At their backs rose the
looming presence of Healy Hall with its imposing Georgian red-brick facade, nineteenthcentury dormer windows, slate roof and central two-hundred-foot clock spire.
The Cambodian turned to Webb. "Professor, thank you. If you hadn't come..."
"Rongsey," Webb said gently, "do you want to talk about it?"
The student's eyes were dark, unreadable. "What's there to say?"
"I suppose that would depend on you."

Rongsey shrugged. "I'll be fine, Professor Webb. Really. This isn't the first time I've
been called names."
Webb stood looking at Rongsey for a moment, and he was swept by sudden emotion
that caused his eyes to sting. He wanted to take the boy in his arms, hold him close,
promise him that nothing else bad would ever happen to him. But he knew that Rongsey's
Buddhist training would not allow him to accept the gesture. Who could say what was
going on beneath that fortresslike exterior. Webb had seen many others like Rongsey,
forced by the exigencies of war and cultural hatred to bear witness to death, the collapse
of a civilization, the kinds of tragedies most Americans could not understand. He felt a
powerful kinship with Rongsey, an emotional bond that was tinged with a terrible sadness,
recognition of the wound inside him that could never truly be healed.
All this emotion stood between them, silently acknowledged perhaps but never
articulated. With a small, almost sad smile, Rongsey formally thanked Webb again and
they said their good-byes.
Webb stood alone amid the students and faculty hurrying by, and yet he knew that he
wasn't truly alone. Despite his best efforts, the aggressive personality of Jason Bourne
had once again asserted itself. He breathed slowly and deeply, concentrating hard, using
the mental techniques his psychiatrist friend, Mo Panov, had taught him for pushing the
Bourne identity down. He concentrated first on his surrounding, on the blue and gold
colors of the spring afternoon, on the gray stone and red brick of the buildings around the
quad, of the movement of the students, the smiling faces of the girls, the laughter of the
boys, the earnest talk of the professors. He absorbed each element in its entirety,
grounding himself in time and place. Then, and only then, did he turn his thoughts inward.
Years ago he had been working for the foreign service in Phnom Penh. He'd been
married then, not to Marie, his current wife, but to a Thai woman named Dao. They had
two children, Joshua and Alyssa, and lived in a house on the bank of the river. America
was at war with North Vietnam, but the war had spilled over into Cambodia. One
afternoon, while he was at work and his family had been swimming in the river, a plane
had strafed them, killing them.
Webb had almost gone mad with grief. Finally, fleeing his house and Phnom Penh,
he'd arrived in Saigon, a man with no past and no future. It had been Alex Conklin who
had taken a heartsick, half-mad David Webb off the streets of Saigon and forged him into
a first-rate clandestine operative. In Saigon, Webb had learned to kill, had turned his own
self-hatred outward, inflicting his rage on others. When a member of Conklin's group—
an evil-tempered drifter named Jason Bourne—had been discovered to be a spy, it was
Webb who had executed him. Webb had come to loathe the Bourne identity, but the truth
was that it had often been his lifeline. Jason Bourne had saved Webb's life more times
than he could remember. An amusing thought if it hadn't been so literal.
Years later, when they had both returned to Washington, Conklin had given him a
long-term assignment. He had become what amounted to a sleeper agent, taking the name
of Jason Bourne, a man long dead, forgotten by everyone. For three years Webb was
Bourne, turned himself into an international assassin of great repute in order to hunt
down an elusive terrorist.

But in Marseilles, his mission had gone terribly wrong. He'd been shot, cast into the
dark waters of the Mediterranean, thought dead. Instead, he had been pulled from the
water by members of a fishing boat, nursed back to health by a drunkard doctor in the
port they'd set him down in. The only problem was that in the shock of almost dying he'd
lost his memory. What had come slowly back were the Bourne memories. It was only
much later, with the help of Marie, his wife-to-be, that he had come to realize the truth,
that he was David Webb. But by that time the Jason Bourne personality was too well
ingrained, too powerful, too cunning to die.
In the aftermath, he'd become two people: David Webb, linguistics professor with a
new wife and, eventually, two children, and Jason Bourne, the agent trained by Alex
Conklin to be a formidable spy. Occasionally, in some crisis, Conklin called on Bourne's
expertise and Webb reluctantly rose to duty. But the truth was that Webb often had little
control over his Bourne personality. What had just happened with Rongsey and the three
street thugs was evidence enough. Bourne had a way of asserting himself that was
beyond Webb's control, despite all the work he and Panov had done.
Khan, having watched David Webb and the Cambodian student talking from across the
quad, ducked into a building diagonally across from Healy Hall, mounted the stairs to the
third floor. Khan was dressed much like all the other students. He looked younger than
his twenty-seven years and no one gave him a second look. He was wearing khakis and a
jeans jacket, over which was slung an outsize backpack. His sneakers made no sound as
he went down the hallway, past the doors to classrooms. In his mind's eye was a clear
picture of the view across the quad. He was again calculating angles, taking into account
the mature trees that might obscure his view of his intended target.
He paused in front of the sixth door, heard a professor's voice from inside. The talk
about ethics brought an ironic smile to his face. In his experience—and it was great and
varied—ethics was as dead and useless as Latin. He went on to the next classroom, which
he had already determined was empty, and went in.
Quickly now, he shut and locked the door behind him, crossed to the line of windows
overlooking the quad, opened one and got to work. From his backpack, he removed a
7.62-mm SVD Dragunov sniper rifle with a collapsible stock. He fitted the optical sight
onto it, leaned it on the sill. Peering through the sight, he found David Webb, by this time
standing alone across the quad in front of Healy Hall. There were trees just to his left.
Every once in a while, a passing student would obscure him. Khan took a deep breath, let
it out slowly. He sighted on Webb's head.
Webb shook his head, shaking off the effect his memories of the past had on him, and
refocusing on his immediate surroundings. The leaves rustled in a gathering breeze, their
tips gilded with sunlight. Close by, a girl, her books clutched to her chest, laughed at the
punchline of a joke. A waft of pop music came from an open window somewhere. Webb,
still thinking of all the things he wanted to say to Rongsey, was about to turn up the front
steps of Healy Hall when a soft phutt! sounded in his ear. Reacting instinctively, he
stepped into the dappled shadows beneath the trees.

You're under attack! shouted Bourne's all-too-familiar voice, reemerging in his mind.
Move now! And Webb's body reacted, scrambling as another bullet, its initial percussion
muffled by a silencer, splintered the tree bark beside his cheek.
A crack marksman. Bourne's thoughts began to flood through Webb's brain in response
to the organism finding itself under attack.
The ordinary world was in Webb's eyes, but the extraordinary world that ran parallel to
it, Jason Bourne's world—secret, rarefied, privileged, deadly—flared like napalm in his
mind. In the space of a heartbeat, he had been torn from David Webb's everyday life, set
apart from everyone and everything Webb held dear. Even the chance meeting with
Rongsey seemed now to belong to another lifetime. From behind, out of the sniper's sight,
he gripped the tree, the pad of his forefinger feeling for the mark the bullet had made. He
looked up. It was Jason Bourne who traced the trajectory of the bullet back to a thirdfloor window in a building diagonally across the quad.
All around him, Georgetown students walked, strolled, talked, argued and debated.
They had seen nothing, of course, and if by chance they had heard anything at all, the
sounds meant nothing to them and were quickly forgotten. Webb left his protection
behind the tree, moving quickly into a knot of students. He mingled with them, hurrying,
but as much as possible keeping to their pace. They were his best protection now,
blocking Webb from the sniper's line of sight.
It seemed as if he was only semiconscious, a sleepwalker who nevertheless saw and
sensed everything with a heightened awareness. A component of this awareness was a
contempt for those civilians who inhabited the ordinary world, David Webb included.
After the second shot, Khan had drawn back, confused. This was not a state he knew
well. His mind raced, assessing what had just happened. Instead of panicking, running
like a frightened sheep back into Healy Hall as Khan had anticipated, Webb had calmly
moved into the cover of the trees, impeding Khan's view. That had been improbable
enough—and totally out of character for the man briefly described in Spalko's dossier—
but then Webb had used the gash the second bullet had made in the tree to gauge its
trajectory. Now, using the students as cover, he was heading toward this very building.
Improbably, he was attacking instead of fleeing.
Slightly unnerved by this unexpected turn of events, Khan hurriedly broke down the
rifle, stowed it away. Webb had gained the steps to the building. He'd be here within
minutes.
Bourne detached himself from the pedestrian flow, raced into the building. Once inside,
he leaped up the stairway to the third floor. He turned left. Seventh door on the left: a
classroom. The corridor was filled with the buzz of students from all over the world—
Africans, Asians, Latin Americans, Europeans. Each face, no matter how briefly
glimpsed, registered on the screen of Jason Bourne's memory.
The low chatter of the students, their fitful bursts of laughter, belied the danger lurking
in the immediate environment. As he approached the classroom door, he opened the
switchblade he had confiscated earlier, curled his fist around it so that the blade protruded
like a spike from between his second and third fingers. In one smooth motion, he pushed

open the door, curled into a ball and tumbled inside, landing behind the heavy oak desk,
some eight feet from the doorway. His knife hand was up; he was ready for anything.
He rose cautiously. An empty classroom leered at him, filled only with chalk dust and
mottled patches of sunlight. He stood looking around for a moment, his nostrils dilated,
as if he could drink in the scent of the sniper, make his image appear out of thin air. He
crossed to the windows. One was open, the fourth from the left. He stood at it, staring out
at the spot beneath the tree where moments ago he had been standing, talking with
Rongsey. This is where the sniper had stood. Bourne could imagine him resting the rifle
barrel on the sill, fitting one eye to the powerful scope, sighting across the quad. The play
of light and shadow, the crossing students, a sudden burst of laughter or cross words. His
finger on the trigger, squeezing in an even pull. Phutt! Phutt! One shot, two.
Bourne studied the windowsill. Glancing around, he went to the metal tray that ran
below the wall of blackboards, scooped out a measure of chalk dust. Returning to the
window, he gently blew the chalk dust from his fingers onto the slate surface of the sill.
Not a single print appeared. It had been wiped clean. He knelt, cast his gaze along the
wall beneath the window, the floor at his feet. He found nothing—no telltale cigarette
butt, no stray hairs, no spent shells. The meticulous assassin had vanished just as expertly
as he had appeared. His heart was pounding, his mind racing. Who would try to kill him?
Surely, it was no one from his current life. The worst that could be said about it was his
argument last week with Bob Drake, the head of the ethics department, whose penchant
for droning on about his chosen field was both legendary and annoying. No, this threat
was coming from Jason Bourne's world. Doubtless, there were many candidates from his
past, but how many of them would be able to trace Jason Bourne back to David Webb?
This was the real question that worried him. Though part of him wanted to go home, talk
this through with Marie, he knew that the one person with sufficient knowledge of
Bourne's shadow existence to be able to help was Alex Conklin, the man who like a
conjurer had created Bourne out of thin air.
He crossed to the phone on the wall, lifted the receiver and punched in his faculty
access code. When he reached an outside line, he dialed Alex Conklin's private number.
Conklin, now semiretired from the CIA, would be at home. Bourne got a busy signal.
Either he could wait here for Alex to get off the phone—which, knowing Alex, could
be a half hour or more—or he could drive to his house. The open window seemed to
mock him. It knew more than he did about what had taken place here.
He left the classroom, heading back down the stairs. Without thinking, he scanned
those around him, looking to match up anyone he had passed on his way to the room.
Hurrying across the campus, he soon reached the car park. He was about to get into his
car when he thought better of it. Making a quick but thorough inspection of the car's
exterior and its engine, he determined that it had not been tampered with. Satisfied, he
slid behind the wheel, turned on the ignition and drove out of the campus.
Alex Conklin lived on a rural estate in Manassas, Virginia. Once Webb reached the
outskirts of Georgetown, the sky took on a deeper radiance; an eerie kind of stillness had
taken root, as if the passing countryside was holding its breath.
As with the Bourne personality, Webb both loved and loathed Conklin. He was father,
confessor, coconspirator, exploiter. Alex Conklin was the keeper of the keys to Bourne's

past. It was imperative he talk to Conklin now because Alex was the only one who would
know how someone stalking Jason Bourne could find David Webb on campus at
Georgetown University.
He'd left the city behind him, and by the time he'd reached the Virginia countryside,
the brightest part of the day had slipped away. Thick banks of clouds obscured the sun,
and gusts of wind swept through the verdant Virginia hillsides. He pressed down on the
accelerator and the car leaped forward, its big engine purring.
As he followed the banked curves of the highway, it suddenly occurred to him that he
hadn't seen Mo Panov in over a month. Mo, an Agency psychologist recommended by
Conklin, was trying to repair Webb's fractured psyche, to suppress the Bourne identity for
good and help Webb recover his lost memories. Through Mo's techniques, Webb had
found chunks of memory he had assumed lost floating back up to his conscious mind. But
the work was arduous, exhausting, and it wasn't unusual for him to halt the sessions
during ends of terms when his life became unbearably hectic.
He turned off the main highway and headed northwest on a two-lane blacktop road.
Why had Panov come into his mind at just this moment? Bourne had learned to trust his
senses and his intuition. Mo popping up out of the blue was a kind of signpost. What
meaning did Panov have for him now? Memory, yes, but what else? Bourne thought back.
The last time they had been together, he and Panov had been talking about silence. Mo
had told him that silence was a useful tool in memory work. The mind, needing to be
busy, did not like silence. If you could induce a complete enough silence in your
conscious mind, it was possible that a memory lost to you would appear to fill the space.
Okay, Bourne thought, but why think about silence just at this moment?
It wasn't until he had turned into Conklin's long, gracefully curving drive that he made
the connection. The sniper had used a silencer, the main purpose of which was to keep
the shooter from being noticed. But a silencer had its drawbacks. In a long-range weapon,
like the one the sniper had been using, it would significantly impair the accuracy of the
shot. He should have been aiming at Bourne's torso—a higher-percentage shot because of
body mass—but instead, he'd fired at Bourne's head. That wasn't logical, if you assumed
the sniper was trying to kill Bourne. But if he was only attempting to frighten, to give
warning—that was another matter. This unknown sniper had an ego, then, but he was not
a showboat; he had left no token of his prowess behind. And yet he had a specific
agenda—that much was clear.
Bourne passed the looming misshapen hulk of the old barn, the other smaller
outbuildings—utility facilities, storage sheds and the like. Then the main house was in
sight. It stood within stands of tall pines, clumps of birch and blue cedars, old wood that
had been here for close to sixty years, predating the stone house by a decade. The estate
had belonged to a now-deceased army general who had been deeply involved in
clandestine and rather unsavory activities. As a result, the manor house—the entire estate,
actually—was honeycombed with underground tunnels, entrances and egresses. Bourne
imagined it amused Conklin to live in a place filled with so many secrets.
As he pulled up, he saw not only Conklin's BMW 7-series but Mo Panov's Jaguar
parked side by side. As he walked across the bluestone gravel, his heart felt suddenly
lighter. The two best friends he had in the world—both in their own ways the keepers of
his past—were inside. Together, they would solve this mystery as they had all the others

before. He climbed onto the front portico, rang the bell. There was no answer. Pressing
his ear to the polished teak door, he could hear voices from within. He tried the handle,
found the door unlocked.
An alarm went off inside his head and, for a moment, he stood behind the half-open
door, listening to everything inside the house. No matter that he was out here in the
countryside where crime was practically unheard of—old habits never died. Conklin's
overactive sense of security would dictate locking the front door whether or not he was
home. Opening the switchblade, he entered, all too aware that an attacker—one of a
termination team sent to kill him—could be lurking inside.
The chandeliered foyer gave out onto a wide sweep of polished wood stairs leading up
to an open gallery that ran the width of the foyer. To the right was the formal living room,
to the left the denlike media room with its wet bar and deep, masculine leather sofas. Just
beyond there was a smaller, more intimate room that Alex had made into his study.
Bourne followed the sound of the voice into the media room. On the large-screen TV a
telegenic CNN commentator was standing outside the front of the Oskjuhlid Hotel. A
superimposed graphic indicated that he was on location in Reykjavik, Iceland. "... the
tenuous nature of the upcoming terrorism summit is on everyone's mind here."
No one was in the room, but there were two old-fashioned glasses on the cocktail table.
Bourne picked one up, sniffed. Speyside single-malt, aged in sherry casks. The complex
aroma of Conklin's favorite Scotch disoriented him, brought back a memory, a vision of
Paris. It was autumn, fiery horse-chestnut leaves tumbling down the Champs-Elysées. He
was looking out the window from an office. He struggled with this vision, which was so
strong he seemed to be pulled out of himself, to actually be in Paris, but, he reminded
himself grimly, he was in Manassas, Virginia, at Alex Conklin's house, and all was not
well. He struggled, trying to maintain his vigilance, his focus, but the memory, triggered
by the scent of the single-malt, was overpowering, and he so yearned to know, to fill in
the gaping holes in his memory. And so he found himself in the Paris office. Whose? Not
Conklin's—Alex had never had an office in Paris. That smell, someone in the office with
him. He turned, saw for the briefest instant the flash of a half-remembered face.
He tore himself away. Even though it was maddening to have a life you remembered
only in fitful bursts, with all that had happened and things here feeling just slightly offkilter, he couldn't afford to get sidetracked. What had Mo said about these triggers? They
could come from a sight, a sound, a smell, even the touch of something, that once the
memory was triggered he could tease it out by repeating the stimulus that had provoked it
in the first place. But not now. He needed to find Alex and Mo.
He looked down, saw a small notepad on the table and picked it up. It seemed blank;
the top leaf had been ripped off. But when he turned it slightly, he could see faint
indentations. Someone—presumably Conklin— had written "NX 20." He pocketed the
pad.
"So, the countdown has begun. In five days' time, the world will know whether a new
day, a new world order will emerge, whether the law-abiding peoples of the world will be
able to live in peace and harmony." The anchor continued to drone on, segueing into a
commercial.
Bourne switched off the TV with the remote and silence descended. It was possible
that Conklin and Mo were out walking, a favorite way for Panov to let off steam while in

conversation, and he, no doubt, would want the old man to get his exercise. But there was
the anomaly of the unlocked door.
Bourne retraced his steps, reentering the foyer and going up the stairs two at a time.
Both guest bedrooms were empty, devoid of any sign of recent habitation, as were their
en suite bathrooms. Down the hall, he went into Conklin's master suite, a Spartan space
befitting an old soldier. The bed was small and hard, not much more than a pallet. It was
unmade, clear that Alex had slept there last night. But as befitted a master of secrets,
there was very little in the way of his past on display. Bourne picked up a silver-framed
snapshot of a woman with long wavy hair, light eyes and a gently mocking smile. He
recognized the regal stone lions of the fountain at Saint-Sulpice in the background. Paris.
Bourne put the photo down, checked the bath. Nothing there of interest.
Back downstairs, two chimes sounded the hour on the clock in Conklin's study. It was
an antique ship's clock, its note bell-like, musical. But for Bourne the sound had
unaccountably taken on an ominous cast. It seemed to him as if the tolling of the bell was
rushing through the house like a black wave, and his heart beat fast.
He went down the hallway, past the kitchen into whose doorway he momentarily
poked his head. A teakettle was on the stove, but the stainless-steel counters were
spotlessly clean. Inside the refrigerator, the ice machine ground out cubes. And then he
saw it—Conklin's walking stick, polished ash with the turned silver knob at its top. Alex
had a bum leg, the result of a particularly violent encounter overseas; he would never
have gone out on the grounds without the stick.
The study was around to the left, a comfortable wood-paneled room in a corner of the
house that looked out onto a tree-shaded lawn, a flagstone terrace in the middle of which
was sunk a lap-pool and, beyond, the beginning of the pine and hardwood forest that ran
for most of the property. With a mounting sense of urgency, Bourne headed for the study.
The moment he entered, he froze.
He was never so aware of the dichotomy inside himself, for part of him had become
detached, an objective observer. This purely analytic section of his brain noted that Alex
Conklin and Mo Panov lay on the richly dyed Persian carpet. Blood had flowed out of
their head wounds, soaked into the carpet, in some places overflowing it, pooling on the
polished wood floor. Fresh blood, still glistening. Conklin was staring up at the ceiling,
his eyes filmed over. His face was flushed and angry, as if all the bile he had been
holding deep inside had been forced to the surface. Mo's head was turned as if he had
been trying to look behind him when he was felled. An unmistakable expression of fear
was etched on his face. In the last instant, he had seen his death coming.
Alex! Mo! Jesus! Jesus! All at once, the emotional dam burst and Bourne was on his
knees, his mind reeling with shock and horror. His entire world was shaken to its core.
Alex and Mo dead—even with the grisly evidence before him it was hard to believe.
Never to speak to them again, never to have access to their expertise. A jumble of images
paraded before him, remembrances of Alex and Mo, times they had spent together, tense
times filled with danger and sudden death, and then, in the aftermath, the ease and
comfort of an intimacy that could only come from shared peril. Two lives taken by force,
leaving behind nothing but anger and fear. With a stunning finality, the door onto his past
slammed shut. Both Bourne and Webb were mourning. Bourne struggled to gather

himself, swept aside Webb's hysterical emotionalism, willed himself not to weep.
Mourning was an indulgence he could not afford. He had to think.
Bourne got busy absorbing the murder scene, fixing details in his mind, trying to work
out what had happened. He moved closer, careful not to step in the blood or to otherwise
disturb the scene. Alex and Mo had been shot to death, apparently with the gun lying on
the carpet between them. They had received one shot each. This was a professional hit,
not an intruder break-in. Bourne's eye caught the glint of the cell phone gripped in Alex's
hand. It appeared as if he had been speaking to someone when he was shot. Had it been
when Bourne was trying to get through to him earlier? Quite possibly. By the look of the
blood, the lividity of the bodies, the lack of rigor mortis in the fingers, it was clear the
murders had happened within the hour.
A faint sound in the distance began to intrude on his thoughts. Sirens! Bourne left the
study and raced to the front-facing window. A fleet of Virginia State Police cruisers was
careening down the driveway, lights flashing. Bourne was caught in a house with the
bodies of two murdered men, and no plausible alibi. He had been set up. All at once, he
felt the prongs of a clever trap closing around him.

CHAPTER TWO
The pieces came together in his mind. The expert shots fired at him on campus had not
been meant to kill him but to herd him, to force him to come to Conklin. But Conklin and
Mo had already been killed. Someone was still here, watching and waiting to call the
police as soon as Bourne had shown up. The man who'd shot at him on campus?
Without a second thought, Bourne grabbed Alex's cell phone, ran into the kitchen,
opened a narrow door onto a steep flight of stairs down into the basement and peered
down into pitch blackness. He could hear the crackling of the police radios, the crunch of
gravel, the pounding on the front door. Querulous voices raised.
Bourne went to the kitchen drawers, scrabbled around until he found Conklin's
flashlight, then went through the basement door; for a moment he was in utter darkness.
The concentrated beam of light illuminated the steps as he descended quickly, silently.
He could smell the scents of concrete, old wood, lacquer and oil from the furnace. He
found the hatch underneath the stairs, pulled it out. Once, on a cold and snowy winter's
afternoon, Conklin had shown him the underground entrance the general had used to get
to the private heliport near the stables. Bourne could hear the boards creaking above his
head. The cops were inside the house. Possibly they had already found the bodies. Three
cars, two dead men. It would not be long before they traced the license tags to his car.
Ducking down, he entered the low passageway, fitted the hatch back into place. Too
late he thought of the old-fashioned glass he had picked up. When the forensics people
dust, they'll find my prints. Those, along with my car parked in the driveway...
No good thinking about that now, he had to move! Bent over, he made his way along
the cramped passageway. Within ten feet it opened up so that he was able to walk
normally. There was a new dampness in the air; from somewhere close at hand he could
hear the slow drip of water seeping. He determined that he had gone beyond the

foundation of the house. Bourne quickened his pace and, not three minutes later, came
upon another set of stairs. These were of metal, military in nature. He mounted them and,
at the top, pushed up with his shoulder. Another hatch opened. Fresh air, the hushed and
tranquil light at the end of the day, the droning of insects washed over him. He was at the
edge of the general's heliport.
The tarmac was littered with twigs and bits of dead branches. At some point, a family
of raccoons had made their way into the small ramshackle shingle-roofed shed at the edge
of the tarmac. The place bore the unmistakable air of abandonment. The heliport was not,
however, his objective. He turned his back on it and plunged into the thick pine forest.
His goal was to make a long sweeping curve away from the house, the entire estate,
eventually ending up on the highway far enough away from any cordon the police threw
around the estate. However, his immediate objective was the stream that ran more or less
diagonally through the property. It would not be long, he knew, before the police brought
in dogs. He could do very little about leaving his scent on dry land, but in the moving
water even the dogs would lose his trail.
Snaking through the thorny snarl of underbrush, he crested a small ridge, stood
between two cedars, listening intently. It was vital to catalog all the normal sounds of this
specific environment so that he would instantly be alerted to the sound of an intruder. He
was keenly aware that an enemy was in all likelihood somewhere close by. The murderer
of his friends, of the moorings of his old life. The desire to stalk that enemy was weighed
against the necessity of escaping from the police. As much as he wanted to track down
the killer, Bourne knew it was crucial for him to be outside the radius of the police
cordon before it was fully set up.
The moment Khan had entered the dense pine and hardwood forest on Alexander
Conklin's estate he felt as if he had come home. The deep green vault closed over his
head, plunging him into a premature twilight. Overhead, he could see sunlight filtering
through the topmost branches, but here all was murk and gloom, the better for him to
stalk his prey. He had followed Webb from the university campus to Conklin's house.
During the course of his career, he had heard of Alexander Conklin, knew him for the
legendary spymaster he had been. What puzzled him was why David Webb should come
here? Why would he even know Conklin? And how was it that so many police had shown
up at the estate mere minutes after Webb himself?
In the distance, he could hear baying, and he knew the police must have let loose their
tracking dogs. Up ahead, he saw Webb moving through the forest as if he knew it well.
Another question without an obvious answer. Khan picked up his pace, wondering where
Webb was headed. Then he heard the sound of a stream and he knew precisely what his
quarry had on his mind.
Khan hurried on, reaching the stream before Webb. He knew his prey would head
downstream, away from the direction in which the hounds were headed. That was when
he saw the huge willow and a grin captured his face. A sturdy tree with a network of
spreading branches was just what he needed.
The ruddy sunlight of early evening threaded itself like needles of fire through the trees,
and Bourne's eye was caught by the splotches of crimson that fired the edge of the leaves.

On the far side of the ridge, the land fell away rather steeply, and the way became
more rocky. He could pick out the soft burbling sound of the nearby stream, and he
headed for it as quickly as he could. The winter's snowpack had combined with the early
spring rains to leave the stream swollen. Without hesitation, he stepped into the chill
water, wading downstream. The longer he stayed in the water the better, as the dogs
would lose all scent of him and become confused, and the farther away he emerged, the
harder it would be for them to pick up his scent again.
Safe for the moment, he began thinking of his wife, Marie. He needed to contact her.
Going home was out of the question now; doing so would put them in immediate
jeopardy. But he had to contact Marie, warn her. The Agency was sure to come looking
for him at home, and not finding him there, they were certain to detain Marie, interrogate
her, assuming she would know his whereabouts. And there was the even more chilling
possibility that whoever had set him up would now try to get to him through his family.
In a sudden sweat of anxiety, he pulled out Conklin's cell phone, dialed Marie's cell
phone, input a text message. It was one word only: Diamond. This was the code word he
and Marie had previously agreed upon, to be used only in dire emergencies. It was a
directive for her to take the kids and leave immediately for their safe house. They were to
stay there, incommunicado, secure, until Bourne gave Marie the "all clear" signal. Alex's
phone rang and Bourne saw Marie's text: Repeat please. This was not the prescribed
response. Then he realized why she was confused. He had contacted her on Alex's cell
phone, not his. He repeated the message: DIAMOND, this time typing it in all capital
letters. He waited, breathless, and then Marie's response came: HOURGLASS. Bourne
exhaled in relief. Marie had acknowledged; he knew the message was real. Even now,
she would be gathering up the kids, bundling them into the station wagon, driving off,
leaving everything behind.
Still, he was left with a feeling of anxiety. He would feel a whole lot better once he
heard her voice, once he could explain to her what had happened, that he was fine. But he
wasn't fine. The man she knew—David Webb—had already been subsumed again by
Bourne. Marie hated and feared Jason Bourne. And why shouldn't she? It was possible
that one day Bourne would be all that was left of the personality in David Webb's body.
And whose doing would that be? Alexander Conklin's.
It seemed astonishing and altogether improbable to him that he could both love and
loathe this man. How mysterious the human mind that it could simultaneously contain
such extreme contradictory emotions, that it could rationalize away those evil qualities it
knew were there in order to feel affection for someone. But, Bourne knew, the need to
love and be loved was a human imperative.
He continued this train of thought as he followed the stream, which, for all its bright
sparkle, was exceptionally clear. Small fish darted this way and that, terrified by his
advance. Once or twice he glimpsed a trout in a silvery flash, bony mouth slightly open
as if seeking something. He had come to a bend in which a large willow, its roots greedy
for moisture, overhung the streambed. Alert to any noise, any sign that his pursuers were
drawing near, Bourne detected nothing but the rushing of the stream itself.
The attack came from above. He heard nothing, but he felt the shift in the light, then a
weight pressing down on him in the instant before he was driven into the water. He felt
the crushing pressure of the body on his midsection and lungs. As he struggled to breathe,

his attacker slammed his head on the slick rocks of the streambed. A fist drove into his
kidney and all the breath went out of him.
Instead of tensing against the attack, Bourne willed his body to go completely limp. At
the same time, instead of striking out, he drew his elbows into his side and, at the moment
when his body was at its most slack, he reared up onto them, twisting his torso. As he
hurled himself around, he struck out and up with the edge of his hand. He gasped air into
his lungs as the weight came off. Water streamed across his face, blurring his vision, so
that he could see only the outline of his assailant. He struck out at him but connected with
nothing but air.
His assailant vanished as quickly as he had appeared.
Khan, gasping and retching as he scrambled down the streambed, tried to force air past
the spasming muscles and bruised cartilage of his throat. Stunned and enraged, he gained
the underbrush and was soon lost within the tangle of the forest. Trying to force himself
to breathe normally, he gently massaged the tender area Webb had struck. That had not
been a lucky blow but a calculated, expert counterattack. Khan was confused, a tinge of
fear creeping through him. Webb was a dangerous man—far more than any academic had
any right to be. He had been shot at before; he could trace a bullet's trajectory, could track
through wilderness, fight hand-to-hand. And at the first sign of trouble he had come to
Alexander Conklin. Who was this man? Khan asked himself. One thing was certain, he
would not underestimate Webb again. He would track him, regain the psychological
advantage. Before the inevitable end, he wanted Webb to be afraid of him.
Martin Lindros, Deputy Director of the CIA, arrived at the Manassas estate of the late
Alexander Conklin at precisely six minutes past six. He was met by the ranking Virginia
State Police detective, a harried, balding man named Harris who was trying to mediate
the territorial dispute that had sprung up between the state police, the county sheriff's
office and the FBI, all of whom had begun vying for jurisdiction as soon as the identities
of the deceased had been discovered. When Lindros emerged from his car, he counted a
dozen vehicles, three times that number of people. What was needed was a sense of order
and purpose.
As he shook hands with Harris, he looked him straight in the eye and said, "Detective
Harris, the FBI is out. You and I will be working this double homicide ourselves."
"Yessir," Harris said crisply. He was tall and, perhaps in compensation, had developed
a slight stoop, which along with his large watery eyes and lugubrious face made him
seem as if he had run out of energy long ago. "Thanks. I've got some—"
"Don't thank me, Detective, I guarantee you this is going to be one bitch of a case." He
dispatched his assistant to deal with the FBI and the sheriff's personnel. "Any sign of
David Webb?" He'd gotten word from the FBI when he'd been patched through to them
that Webb's car had been found parked in Conklin's driveway. Not Webb, really. Jason
Bourne. Which was why the Director of Central Intelligence had dispatched him to take
over the investigation personally.
"Not yet," Harris said. "But we have the dogs out."
"Good. Have you established a cordon perimeter?"

"I tried to send my men out, but then the FBI..." Harris shook his head "I told them
time was of the essence."
Lindros glanced at his watch. "Half-mile perimeter. Use some of your men to work
another cordon at a radius of a quarter-mile. They might pick up something useful. Call
in more personnel if you have to."
While Harris was talking on his walkie-talkie, Lindros eyed him ap-praisingly. "What's
your first name?" he asked when the detective was through giving orders.
The detective gave him an abashed look. "Harry."
"Harry Harris. You're kidding, right?"
"No, sir. I'm afraid not."
"What were your parents thinking?"
"I don't think they were, sir."
"Okay, Harry. Let's take a look at what we have here." Lindros was in his late thirties,
a smart sandy-haired Ivy Leaguer who had been recruited to the Agency out of
Georgetown. Lindros' father had been a strong-willed man who spoke his mind and had
his own way of doing things. He instilled this quirky independence in young Martin,
along with the sense of duty to his country, and Lindros believed it was these qualities
that had caught the attention of the DCI.
Harris brought him into the study but not before Lindros had marked the two oldfashioned glasses on the cocktail table in the media room. "Anyone touch these, Harry?"
"Not to my knowledge, sir."
"Call me Martin. We're going to get to know each other fast." He looked up and smiled,
to further put the other at ease. The manner in which he had thrown around the Agency's
weight was deliberate. In cutting out the other law enforcement agencies, he had drawn
Harris into his orbit. He had a feeling he was going to need a compliant detective. "Have
your foren-sics people dust both glasses for prints, will you?"
"Right away."
"And now let's have a word with the coroner."
High atop the road that snaked along the ridge bordering the estate, a heavyset man
stood peering at Bourne through a pair of powerful night-vision glasses. He had a wide
melon face distinctly Slavic in character. The fingertips of his left hand were yellow; he
smoked constantly, compulsively. Behind him, his large black SUV was parked in a
scenic turnout. To anyone passing, he would look like a tourist. Tracking backward, he
found Khan creeping through the woods on Bourne's trail. Keeping one eye on Khan's
progress, he flipped open his tri-band cell phone, punched in an overseas number.
Stepan Spalko answered at once.
"The trap has been sprung," the heavyset Slav said. "The target is on the run. So far he
has eluded both the police and Khan."
"Goddammit!" Spalko said. "What is Khan up to?"
"Do you want me to find out?" the man asked in his cold, casual manner.
"Keep as far away from him as possible. In fact," Spalko said, "get out of there now."

Staggering to the stream bank, Bourne sat down, slicked his hair back from his face.
His body ached and his lungs felt as if they were on fire. Explosions went off behind his
eyes, returning him to the jungles of Tarn Quan, the missions David Webb had
undertaken at Alex Conklin's behest, missions sanctioned by Saigon Command yet
disavowed by them, insane missions so difficult, so deadly that no American military
personnel could ever be associated with them.
Bathed in the failing light of a spring evening, Bourne knew that he had been thrust
into the same kind of situation now. He was in a red zone—an area controlled by the
enemy. The trouble was, he had no idea who the enemy was or what he intended. Was
Bourne even now being herded as he apparently had been when he had been fired upon at
Georgetown University, or had his enemy moved on to a new phase of his plan?
Far off, he heard the baying of dogs, and then, startlingly close at hand, the crisp, clear
sound of a twig snapping. Had it been made by an animal or the enemy? His immediate
objective had been altered. He still had to avoid the net of the police cordon but now, at
the same time, he had to find a way to turn the tables on his attacker. The trouble was he
had to find his assailant before he attacked Bourne again. If it was the same person as
before, then he was not only a crack shot but also an expert at jungle warfare. In a way,
knowing this much about his adversary heartened Bourne. He was getting to know his
opponent. Now to avoid being killed before he could get to know him well enough to
surprise him...
The sun had slipped below the horizon, leaving the sky the color of a banked fire. A
cool wind caused Bourne to shiver in his wet clothes. He rose and began to move, both to
get the stiffness out of his muscles and to warm himself. The forest was cloaked in indigo,
and yet he felt as exposed as if he were in a treeless expanse beneath a cloudless sky.
He knew what he would do if he were in Tam Quan: He'd find shelter, a place to
regroup and consider options. But finding shelter in a red zone was tricky; he might be
putting his head in a trap. He moved through the forest slowly and deliberately, his eyes
scanning tree trunk after tree trunk until he found what he was looking for. Virginia
creeper. It was too early in the year for flowers, but the shiny five-lobed leaves were
unmistakable. Using the switchblade, he carefully peeled off long lengths of the sturdy
vine.
Moments after he was finished, his ears pricked up. Following a faint sound, he soon
came to a small clearing. There. He saw a deer, a mid-sized buck. Its head was up, its
black nostrils scenting the air. Had it smelled him? No. It was trying to find—
The deer took off, and Bourne with him. He ran lightly and silently through the forest
paralleling the deer's path. Once, the wind shifted and he had to alter his course in order
to remain downwind of the animal. They had covered perhaps a quarter of a mile when
the deer slowed. The ground had risen, become harder, more compact. They were quite
some distance from the stream and on the extreme edge of the estate. The deer leaped
easily over the stone wall marking the northwestern corner of the property. Bourne
clambered over the wall in time to see that the deer had led him to a salt lick. Salt licks
meant rocks and rocks meant caves. He recalled Con-klin telling him that the
northwestern edge of the property abutted a series of caves honeycombed with chimneys,
natural vertical holes the Indians had once used to vent their cooking fires. Such a cave

was just what he was hoping for—a haven to temporarily hide in that, by virtue of its two
egresses, would not become a trap.
Now I have him, Khan thought. Webb had made a huge mistake—he'd entered the
wrong cave, one of the few without a second exit. Khan crept out from his hiding place,
crossing the small clearing in silence and in stealth, entering the black mouth of the cave.
Creeping forward, he could sense Webb in the darkness up ahead. Khan knew by the
smell that this one was shallow. It did not have the damp, sharp scent of built-up organic
matter of a cave that went deep into the bedrock.
Up ahead, Webb had switched on the flashlight. In a moment he would see that there
was no chimney, no other way out. The time to attack was now! Khan launched himself
at his adversary, struck him flush in the face.
Bourne went down, the flashlight hitting the rock, the light bouncing crazily. At the
same time, he could feel the rush of air as the balled fist flew toward him. He allowed it
to strike him and, as the arm was extended to the fullest, chopped down hard on the
exposed and vulnerable biceps.
Lunging forward, he jammed his shoulder into the sternum of the other body. A knee
came up, connected with the inside of Bourne's thigh, and a line of nerve pain flashed
through him. He seized a handful of clothes, jerked the body against the rock face. The
body bounced back, rammed into him, bowling him off his feet. They rolled together,
grappling at each other. He could hear the other's breathing, an incongruously intimate
sound, like listening to a child's breath beside you.
Locked in an elemental struggle, Bourne was close enough to smell a complex
melange rising off the other like steam from a sunlit swamp that made the jungle of Tarn
Quan rear up once more in his mind. In that instant, he felt a bar against his throat. He
was being hauled backward.
"I won't kill you," a voice said in his ear. "At least not yet."
He jabbed backward with an elbow, was rewarded with a knee to his already aching
kidney. He doubled over but was hauled painfully erect by the bar against his windpipe.
"I could kill you now, but I won't," the voice said. "Not until there is enough light so
that I can look into your eyes while you die."
"Did you have to kill two innocent decent men just to get to me?" Bourne said.
"What are you talking about?"
"The two people you shot to death back at the house."
"I didn't kill them; I never kill innocents." There was a chuckle. "On the other hand, I
don't know that I could call anyone associated with Alexander Conklin an innocent."
"But you herded me here," Bourne said. "You shot at me so I'd run to Conklin, so you
could—"
"You're talking nonsense," the voice said. "I merely followed you here."
"Then how did you know where to send the cops?" Bourne said.
"Why would I even call them?" the voice whispered harshly.

Startling though this information was, Bourne was only half-listening. He had relaxed
a little during this conversation, leaning backward. This left the smallest bit of slack
between the bar and his windpipe. Bourne now turned on the balls of his feet, dropping
one shoulder as he did so, so that the other was obliged to focus his attention on keeping
the bar in place. In that instant, Bourne used the heel of his hand to deliver a quick strike
just below the ear. The body fell hard; the bar rang hollowly as it struck the rock floor.
Bourne took several deep breaths to clear his head, but he was still woozy from loss of
oxygen. He took up the flashlight, illuminated the spot where the body had fallen, but it
wasn't there. A sound, barely a whisper, came to him and he raised the beam. A figure
sprang into the light against the mouth of the cave. As the light struck him, he turned, and
Bourne got a glimpse of his face before he vanished into the trees.
Bourne ran after him. In a moment he heard the distinct snap and whoosh! He heard
movement up ahead, and he pushed through the undergrowth to where he had set his trap.
He had woven the Virginia creeper into a net and tied it to a green sapling he had bent
almost double. It had caught his assailant. The hunter had become the prey. Bourne
pushed forward to the base of the trees, prepared himself to face his attacker and cut the
creeper netting down. But the net was empty.
Empty! He gathered it up, saw the rent his quarry had cut into its upper section. He had
been quick, clever and prepared; he would be even more difficult to take by surprise
again.
Bourne looked up, playing the cone of the flashlight beam in an arc across the maze of
tree limbs. Despite himself, he experienced a fleeting twinge of admiration for his expert
and resourceful adversary. Snapping off the flashlight, he was plunged into night. A
whippoorwill cried out and then, in the lengthening silence, an owl's hoot echoed
mournfully through the pine-clad hills.
He leaned his head back and took a deep breath. Against the screen of his mind's eye
the flat planes, the dark eyes of the face was limned, and in a moment he was certain that
it matched up with one of the students he had seen on his way to the university classroom
the sniper had used. At last, his enemy had a face as well as a voice.
"I could kill you now, but I won't. Not until there is enough light so that I can look into
your eyes while you die."

CHAPTER THREE
.Humanistas, Ltd., an international human-rights organization known the world over
for its worldwide humanitarian and relief work, was headquartered on the deep green
western slope of Gellért Hill in Budapest. From this magnificent vantage point, Stepan
Spalko, peering through the huge angled plate-glass windows, imagined the Danube and
the entire city genuflecting at his feet.
He had come around from behind his huge desk to sit on an upholstered chair facing
the very dark-skinned Kenyan president. Flanking the door were the Kenyan's
bodyguards, hands tucked at the smalls of their backs, the blank look endemic to all such
government personnel etched on their faces. Above them, molded in bas-relief on the

wall, was the green cross held in the palm of a hand that was Humanistas' well-marketed
logo. The president's name was Jomo and he was a Kikuyu, the largest ethnic tribe of
Kenya, and a direct descendant of Jomo Kenyatta, the Republic's first president. Like his
famous forebear, he was a Mzee, Swahili for a respected elder. Between them was an
ornate silver service dating back to the 1700s. Fine black tea had been poured, biscuits
and exquisitely turned-out small sandwiches artfully arranged on a chased oval tray. The
two men were talking in low, even tones.
"One doesn't know where to begin to thank you for the generosity you and your
organization have shown us," Jomo said. He was sitting up very straight, his ramrod back
pulled a little away from the comfort of the chair's plush back. Time and circumstance
had combined to rob his face of much of the vitality it had held in his youth. There was,
beneath the high gloss of his skin, a grayish pallor. His features had been compressed,
ossified into stone by hardship and perseverance in the face of overwhelming odds. In
short, he had the aspect of a warrior too long at siege. His legs were together, bent at the
knee at a precise ninety-degree angle. He held in his lap a long, polished box of deepgrained bubinga wood. Almost shyly, he presented the box to Spalko. "With the heartfelt
blessings of the Kenyan people, sir."
"Thank you, Mr. President. You are too kind," Spalko said graciously.
"The kindness is surely yours, sir." Jomo watched with keen interest as Spalko opened
the box. Inside was a flat-bladed knife and a stone, more or less oval in shape, with a
flattish bottom and top.
"My God, this isn't a githathi stone, is it?"
"It is, indeed, sir," Jomo said with obvious delight. "It is from my birth village, from
the kiama to which I still belong."
Spalko knew Jomo was referring to the council of elders. The githathi was of great
value to tribal members. When a dispute arose within the council that could not otherwise
be settled, an oath was taken on this stone. Spalko gripped the knife's handle, which was
carved from carnelian. It, too, had a ritualistic purpose. In cases of life or death disputes,
the blade of this knife was first heated, then laid onto the tongues of the disputants. The
extent of the tongues' subsequent blistering determined their guilt or innocence.
"I wonder, though, Mr. President," Spalko said with the hint of an impish tone,
"whether the githathi comes from your kiama or your njama*"
Jomo laughed, a rumble deep in his throat that made his small ears quiver. It was so
rare he had cause to laugh these days. He could not remember the last time. "So you have
heard of our secret councils, have you, sir? I would say your knowledge of our customs
and lore is formidable, indeed."
"The history of Kenya is long and bloody, Mr. President. I am a firm believer that it is
in history we learn all our most important lessons."
Jomo nodded. "I concur, sir. And I feel compelled to reiterate that I cannot imagine
what state the Republic would be in without your doctors and their vaccines."
"There is no vaccine against AIDS." Spalko's voice was gentle but firm. "Modern
medicine can curtail the suffering and deaths from the disease with drug cocktails, but as
for its spread, only the stringent application of contraceptives or abstinence will be
effective."

"Of course, of course." Jomo wiped his lips fastidiously. He detested coming hat in
hand to this man who had already so generously extended his help to all Kenyans, but
what choice did he have? The AIDS epidemic was decimating the Republic. His people
were suffering, dying. "What we need, sir, is more of the drugs. You have done much to
alleviate the level of suffering in my country. But there are thousands yet to receive your
help."
"Mr. President." Spalko leaned forward, and with him, Jomo as well. His head was
now in the sunlight streaming in through the high windows, lending him an almost
preternatural glow. The light also threw into prominence the shiny poreless skin on the
left side of his face. This accentuation of his disfigurement served to provide a slight
shock to Jomo, jolting him out of his predetermined pattern. "Humanistas, Ltd. is
prepared to return to Kenya with twice the number of doctors, double the amount of
drugs. But you—the government—must do your part."
It was at this point that Jomo realized that Spalko was asking of him something quite
apart from promoting safe-sex lectures and distributing condoms. Abruptly, he turned,
dismissing his two bodyguards from the room. When the door had closed behind them, he
said, "An unfortunate necessity in these dangerous times, sir, but even so one sometimes
wearies of never being alone."
Spalko smiled. His knowledge of Kenyan history and tribal customs made it
impossible for him to take the president lightly, as others might. Jomo's need might be
great, but one never wanted to take advantage of him. The Kikuyu were prideful people,
an attribute made all the more important since it was more or less the only thing of value
they possessed.
Spalko leaned over, opened a humidor, offered a Cuban Cohiba to Jomo, took one
himself. They rose, lighting their cigars, walked across the carpet to stand at the window,
looking out at the tranquil Danube sparkling in the sunlight.
"A most beautiful setting," Spalko said conversationally.
"Indeed," Jomo affirmed.
"And so serene." Spalko let go a blue cloud of aromatic smoke. "Difficult to come to
terms with the amount of suffering in other parts of the world." He turned then to Jomo.
"Mr. President, I would consider it a great personal favor if you would grant me seven
days' unlimited access to Kenyan airspace."
"Unlimited?"
"Coming and going, landings and such. No customs, immigration, inspections, nothing
to slow us down."
Jomo made a show of considering. He puffed some on his Cohiba, but Spalko could
tell that he was not enjoying himself. "I can grant you only three," Jomo said at length.
"Longer than that will cause tongues to wag."
"That will have to do, Mr. President." Three days was all Spalko had wanted. He could
have insisted on the seven days, but that would have stripped Jomo of his pride. A stupid
and possibly costly mistake, considering what was to happen. In any event, he was in the
business of promoting goodwill, not resentment. He held out his hand and Jomo slipped
his dry, heavily calloused hand into his. Spalko liked that hand; it was a hand of a manual
laborer, someone who was not afraid to get dirty.

After Jomo and his entourage had left, it was time to give an orientation tour to Ethan
Hearn, the new employee. Spalko could have delegated the orientation to any one of a
number of assistants, but he prided himself on personally making sure all his new
employees were settled. Hearn was a bright young spark who had previously worked at
the Eurocenter Bio-I Clinic on the other side of the city. He was a highly successful fundraiser and was well connected among the rich and elite of Europe. Spalko found him to
be articulate, personable and empathetic—in short, a born humanitarian, just the sort he
needed to maintain the stellar reputation of Humanistas, Ltd. Besides which, he genuinely
liked Hearn. He reminded him of himself when he was young, before the incident that
had burned off half the skin of his face. He took Hearn through the seven floors of offices,
comprising laboratories, departments devoted to compiling the statistics the development
people used in fund-raising, the lifeblood of organizations such as Humanistas, Ltd., as
well as accounting, procurement, human resources, travel, the maintenance of the
company's fleets of private jets, transport planes, ships and helicopters. The last stop was
the development department, where Hearn's new office awaited him. At the moment, the
office stood empty save for a desk, swivel chair, computer and phone console.
"The rest of your furniture," Spalko told him, "will be arriving in a few days."
"No problem, sir. A computer and phones are all I really need." "A warning," Spalko
added. "We keep long hours here, and there will be times you'll be expected to work
through the night. But we're not inhuman. The sofa we provide folds out into a bed."
Hearn smiled. "Not to worry, Mr. Spalko. I'm quite used to those hours." "Call me
Stepan." Spalko gripped the younger man's hand. "Everyone else does."
The Director of Central Intelligence was soldering the arm on a painted tin soldier—a
British redcoat from the Revolutionary War—when the call came. At first he considered
ignoring it, perversely letting the phone ring even though he knew who would be on the
other end of the line. Perhaps, he thought, this was because he did not want to hear what
the Deputy Director would have to say. Lindros believed the DCI had dispatched him to
the crime scene because of the importance of the dead men to the Agency. This was true,
as far as it went. The real reason, however, was that the DCI couldn't bear to go himself.
The thought of seeing Alex Conklin's dead face was too much for him.
He was sitting on a stool in his basement workshop, a tiny, enclosed, perfectly ordered
environment of stacked drawers, aligned cubbyholes, a world unto itself, a place his
wife—and his children when they had lived at home—were forbidden to enter.
His wife, Madeleine, poked her head through the open door to the cellar. "Kurt, the
phone," she said needlessly.
He took an arm out of the wooden bin of soldier parts, studied it. He was a largeheaded man, but a mane of white hair combed back from his wide, domed forehead lent
him the aspect of a wiseman, if not a prophet. His cool blue eyes were still as calculating
as ever, but the lines at the corners of his mouth had deepened, pulling them down into
something of a perpetual pout.
"Kurt, do you hear me?"

"I am not deaf." The fingers at the end of the arm were slightly cupped as if the hand
was preparing to reach out for something unnameable and unknown.
"Well, are you going to answer it?" Madeleine called down.
"Whether I answer it or not is none of your goddamn business!" he shouted with
vehemence. "Will you go to bed now." A moment later he heard the satisfying whisper of
the basement door closing. Why couldn't she leave him alone at a time like this? he
fumed. Thirty years married, you'd think she'd know better.
He returned to his work, fitting the arm with the cupped hand to the shoulder of the
torso, red to red, deciding on the final position. This was how the DCI dealt with
situations over which he had no control. He played god with his miniature soldiers,
buying them, cutting them to pieces, then, later, reconstructing them, molding them into
the positions that suited him. Here, in the world he himself had created, he controlled
everyone and everything.
The phone continued to ring in its mechanical, monotonous fashion and the DCI gritted
his teeth, as if the sound was abrasive. What marvelous deeds had been accomplished in
the days when he and Alex had been young! The mission inside Russia when they had
almost landed in the Lubyanka, running the Berlin Wall, extracting secrets from the
Staasi, vetting the defector from the KGB in the Vienna safe house, discovering that he
was a double. The killing of Bernd, their longtime contact, the compassion with which
they had told his wife that they would take care of Bernd's son Dieter, take him back to
America, put him through college. They had done precisely that and had been rewarded
for their generosity. Dieter had never returned to his mother. Instead, he had joined the
Agency, had for many years been the director of the Science & Technology Directorate
until the fatal motorcycle accident.
Where had that life gone? Laid to rest in Bernd's grave, and Dieter's— now Alex's.
How had it been reduced so quickly to flashpoints in his memory? Time and
responsibilities had crippled him, no question. He was an old man now, in some respects
with more power, yes, but the daring deeds of yesterday, the elan with which he and Alex
had bestrode the secret world, changing the fate of nations, had burned to ash, never to
return.
The DCI's fist hammered the tin soldier into a cripple. Then and only then did he pick
up the phone.
"Yes, Martin."
There was a weariness in his voice Lindros picked up on immediately. "Are you all
right, sir?"
"No, I fucking well am not all right!" This was what the DCI had wanted. Another
opportunity to vent his anger and frustration. "How could I be all right given the
circumstances?"
"I'm sorry, sir."
"No, you're not," the DCI said waspishly. "You couldn't be. You have no idea." He
stared at the soldier he had crushed, his mind hounded by past glories. "What is it you
want?"
"You asked for an update, sir."

"Did I?" The DCI rested his head in his hand. "Yes, I suppose I did. What have you
found?"
"The third car in Conklin's driveway belongs to David Webb."
The DCI's keen ear responded to a tone in Lindros' voice. "But?"
"But there's no sign of Webb."
"Of course there isn't."
"He was definitely there, though. We gave the dogs a sniff at the interior of his car.
They found his scent on the property and followed it into the woods but lost it at a
stream."
The DCI closed his eyes. Alexander Conklin and Morris Panov shot to death, Jason
Bourne MIA and on the loose five days before the terrorism summit, the most important
international meeting of the century. He shuddered. He abhorred loose ends, but not
nearly as much as Roberta Alonzo-Ortiz, the National Security Advisor, and these days
she was running the show. "Ballistics? Forensics?"
"Tomorrow morning," Lindros said. "That was as much as I could push them."
"As far as the FBI and other law-enforcement agencies—"
"I've already neutralized them. We have a clear field."
The DCI sighed. He appreciated the DDCI's initiative, but he despised being
interrupted. "Get back to work," he said gruffly, and cradled the receiver.
For a long time afterward, he stared into the wooden bin, listening to the house
breathing. It sounded like an old man. Boards creaked, familiar as an old friend's voice.
Madeleine must be making herself a cup of hot chocolate, her traditional sleep aid. He
heard the neighbor's corgi bark, and for some reason he could not fathom, it seemed a
mournful sound, full of sorrow and failed hope. At length, he reached into the bin, picked
out a torso in Civil War gray, a new tin soldier to create.

CHAPTER FOUR
"Must've been some accident, by the look of you," Jack Kerry said.
"Not really, just a flat," Bourne replied easily. "But I didn't have a spare, and then I
tripped on something—a tree root, I think. I took quite a tumble into the stream." He
made a deprecating gesture. "I'm not exactly well coordinated."
"Join the crew," Kerry said. He was a large, rawboned man with a double chin and too
much fat around his middle. He had picked Bourne up a mile back. "One time my wife
asked me to run the dishwasher, I filled it up with Tide. Jesus, you should've seen the
mess!" He laughed good-naturedly.
The night was pitch-dark, no moon or stars. A soft drizzle had begun and Kerry put on
the windshield wipers. Bourne shivered a little in his damp clothes. He knew he had to
focus, but every time he closed his eyes he saw images of Alex and Mo; he saw blood
seeping, bits of skull and brain. His fingers curled, hands tightening into fists.
"So what is it you do, Mr. Little?"

Bourne had given his name as Dan Little when Kerry introduced himself. Kerry, it
appeared, was an old-style gentleman who put great store in the niceties of convention.
"I'm an accountant."
"I design nuclear waste facilities, myself. Travel far and wide, yessir." Kerry gave him
a sideways glance, light spinning off his glasses. "Hell, you don't look like an accountant,
you don't mind me saying."
Bourne forced himself to laugh. "Everyone says that. I played football in college."
"Haven't let yourself go to seed like many ex-athletes," Kerry observed. He patted his
rotund abdomen. "Not like me. Except I never was an athlete. I tried once. Never knew
which way to run. Got screamed at by the coach. And then I got tackled good." He shook
his head. "That was enough for me. I'm a lover, not a fighter." He glanced at Bourne
again. "You got a family, Mr. Little?"
Bourne hesitated a moment. "A wife and two children."
"Happy, are ya?"
A wedge of black trees hurried by, a telephone pole leaning into the wind, a shack
abandoned, draped with thorny creeper, returned to the wild. Bourne closed his eyes.
"Very happy."
Kerry manhandled the car around a sweeping curve. One thing you could say about
him—he was an excellent driver. "Me, I'm divorced. That was a bad one. My wife left me
with my three-year-old in tow. That was ten years ago." He frowned. "Or is it eleven?
Anyway, I haven't seen or heard from either her or the boy since."
Bourne's eyes snapped open. "You haven't been in touch with your son?"
"It's not that I haven't tried." There was a querulous note to Kerry's voice as he turned
defensive. "For a while, I called every week, sent him letters, money, you know, for
things he might like, a bike and such. Never heard a word back."
"Why didn't you go to see him?"
Kerry shrugged. "I finally got the message—he didn't want to see me."
"That was your wife's message," Bourne said. "Your son's only a child. He doesn't
know what he wants. How can he? He hardly knows you."
Kerry grunted. "Easy for you to say, Mr. Little. You've got a warm hearth, a happy
family to go home to every night."
"It's precisely because I have children that I know how precious they are," Bourne said.
"If it was my son, I'd fight tooth and nail to know him and to get him back into my life."
They were coming to a more populated area now, and Bourne saw a motel, a strip of
closed stores. In the distance, he could see a red flash, then another. There was a
roadblock up ahead and, by the look of it, a major one. He counted eight cars in all, in
two ranks of four each, turned at forty-five degrees to the highway in order to afford their
occupants the greatest protection while allowing the cars to quickly close ranks if need be.
Bourne knew he couldn't allow himself to get anywhere near the roadblock, not, at least,
sitting in plain view. He would have to find some other way to get through it.
All at once, the neon sign of an all-night convenience store loomed out of the darkness.
"I think this is as far as I'll go."

"You sure, Mr. Little? It's still pretty desolate out here."
"Don't worry about me. I'll just have my wife come and pick me up. We don't live far
from here."
"Then I should take you all the way home."
"I'll be fine here. Really."
Kerry pulled over and slowed to a stop just past the convenience store. Bourne got out.
"Thanks for the lift."
"Any time." Kerry smiled. "And, Mr. Little, thanks for the advice. I'll think on what
you said."
Bourne watched Kerry drive off, then he turned and walked into the convenience store.
The ultra-bright fluorescent lights made his eyes burn. The attendant, a pimply-faced
young man with long hair and bloodshot eyes, was smoking a cigarette and reading a
paperback book. He looked up briefly as Bourne entered, nodded disinterestedly and
went back to his reading. Somewhere a radio was on; someone was singing "Yesterday's
Gone," in a world-weary, melancholy voice. She might have been singing it for Bourne.
One look at the shelves reminded him that he hadn't eaten since lunch. He grabbed a
plastic jar of peanut butter, a box of crackers, some beef jerky, orange juice and water.
Protein and vitamins were what he needed. He also purchased a T-shirt, a long-sleeved
striped shirt, razor and shaving cream, other items he knew from long experience he
would need.
Bourne approached the counter, and the attendant put down the dogeared book he had
been reading. Dhalgren by Samuel R. Delany. Bourne remembered reading it just after he
returned from Nam, a book as hallucinatory as the war. Fragments of his life came
hurtling back—the blood, the death, the rage, the reckless killing, all to blot out the
excruciating, never-ending pain of what had happened in the river just outside his house
in Phnom Penh. "You've got a warm hearth, a happy family to go home to every night,"
Kerry had said. If only he knew.
"Anything else?" the pimply-faced young man said.
Bourne blinked, returning to the present. "Do you have an electrical charger for a cell
phone?"
"Sorry, bud, all out."
Bourne paid for his purchases in cash, took possession of the brown paper bag and left.
Ten minutes later he walked onto the motel grounds. There were few cars. A tractortrailer was parked at one end of the motel, a refrigerated truck, by the look of the
compressor squatting on its top. Inside the office a spindly man with the gray face of an
undertaker shuffled out from behind a desk in the rear, where he'd been watching an
ancient portable black-and-white TV. Bourne checked in using another assumed name,
paying for the room in cash. He was left with precisely sixty-seven dollars.
"Goddamn strange night," the spindly man rasped.
"How so?"
The spindly man's eyes lit up. "Don't tell me ya didn't hear about the murders?"
Bourne shook his head.

"Not twenty miles away." The spindly man leaned over the counter. His breath smelled
unpleasantly from coffee and bile. "Two men—government people—nobody sayin'
nothin' else about 'em, an' y'know what that means around here: hush-hush, deep-throat,
cloak-an'-dagger, who the hell knows what they was up to? You turn on CNN when you
get to the room, we got cable an' everything." He handed Bourne the key. "Putcha in a
room at the other end from Guy—he's the trucker, might have seen his semi when you
came in. Guy makes a reg'lar run from Florida to D.C.; he'll be leavin' at five, don't
wantcha disturbed, now do we?"
The room was a drab brown, timeworn. Even the smell of an industrial-strength
cleaner could not entirely blot out the odor of decay. Bourne turned on the TV, switching
channels. He took out the peanut butter and crackers, began to eat.
"There is no doubt that this bold, visionary initiative of the president's has a chance to
build bridges toward a more peaceful future," the CNN newsreader was saying. Behind
her, a graphic banner in screaming red across the top of the screen proclaimed the
terrorism summit with all the subtlety of a London tabloid. "The summit includes, besides
the president himself, the president of Russia and the leaders of the major Arab nations.
Over the course of the coming week, we'll be checking in with Wolf Blitzer with the
president's party and Christiane Amanpour with the Russian and Arab leaders for indepth commentaries. Clearly, the summit has the makings of the news story of the year.
Now, for an up-to-the-minute report from Reykjavik, Iceland ..."
The scene switched to the front of the Oskjuhlid Hotel, where the terrorism summit
would take place in five days' time. An overearnest CNN reporter began to conduct an
interview with the head of American security, Jamie Hull. Bourne stared at Hull's squarejawed face, his short brush-cut hair, ginger-colored mustache, cold blue eyes, and an
alarm went off in his head. Hull was Agency, high up in its Counterterrorist Center. He
and Conklin had butted heads more than once. Hull was a clever political animal; he had
his nose up the ass of everyone who counted. But he went by the book even when
situations dictated he take a more flexible approach. Conklin must have been apoplectic
at his being named head of the American security at the summit.
While Bourne was considering this, a news update took over the crawl on the screen. It
concerned the deaths of Alexander Conklin and Dr. Morris Panov, both, according to the
crawl, high-level government officials. All at once, the scene shifted and a banner reading
breaking news flashed on, followed by another, manassas murders, which was
superimposed above a government photo of David Webb that took up almost the entire
screen. The newsreader began her update on the brutal murders of Alex Conklin and Dr.
Morris Panov. "Each was shot once in the head," the newsreader said with all the grim
delight of her ilk, "indicating the work of a professional killer. The government's prime
suspect is this man, David Webb. Webb may be using an alias, Jason Bourne. According
to highly placed government sources, Webb, or Bourne, is delusional and is considered
dangerous. If you see this man, do not approach. Call the number listed on your
screen...."
Bourne switched off the sound. Christ, the shit had really hit the fan now. No wonder
that roadblock up ahead had looked so well organized— it was Agency, not the local
cops.

He had better get to work. Brushing crumbs off his lap, he pulled out Conklin's cell
phone. It was time to find out who Alex had been talking to when he had been shot. He
accessed the auto-redial key, listened to the ring on the other end. A prerecorded message
came on. This wasn't a personal number; it was a business. Lincoln Fine Tailors. The
thought that Conklin was talking to his tailor when he was shot to death was depressing,
indeed. It was no way for a master spy to go out.
He accessed the last incoming call, which was from the previous evening. It was from
the DCI. Dead end, Bourne thought. He rose. As he padded to the bathroom, he stripped
off his clothes. For a long time he stood under the hot shower spray, his mind deliberately
blank as he sluiced the dirt and sweat off his skin. It was good to feel warm again and
clean. Now if only he had a fresh set of clothes. All at once his head came up. He wiped
water out of his eyes, his heart beating fast, his mind fully engaged again. Conklin's
clothes were made by Old World Tailors off M Street; Alex had been going there for
years. He even had dinner with the owner, a Russian immigrant, once or twice a year.
In something of a frenzy Bourne dried himself off, took up Conklin's phone again and
dialed information. After he had gotten Lincoln Fine Tailors' address in Alexandria, he
sat on the bed, staring at nothing. He was wondering just what it was Lincoln Fine Tailors
did besides cut fabric and sew hems.
Hasan Arsenov appreciated Budapest in ways Khalid Murat could never have. He said
as much to Zina Hasiyev as they passed through Immigration.
"Poor Murat," she said. "A brave soul, a courageous fighter for independence, but his
thinking was strictly nineteenth century." Zina, Arsenov's trusted lieutenant as well as his
lover, was small, wiry, as athletic as Arsenov himself. Her hair was long, black as night,
swirling around her head like a corona. Her wide mouth and dark, lustrous eyes also
contributed to her wild, gypsylike appearance, but her mind could be as detached and
calculating as a litigator's, and she was stone-cold fearless.
Arsenov grunted in pain as he ducked into the back of the waiting limousine. The
assassin's shot had been perfect, striking muscle only, the bullet exiting his thigh as
cleanly as it had entered. The wound hurt like hell, but the pain was worth it, Arsenov
thought as he settled in beside his lieutenant. No suspicion had fallen on him; even Zina
had no idea he had colluded in Murat's assassination. But what choice had he had? Murat
had been growing increasingly nervous regarding the consequences of the Shaykh's plan.
He hadn't had Arsenov's vision, his monumental sense of social justice. He would have
been content merely to win back Chechnya from the Russians, while the rest of the world
turned its back in scorn.
Whereas, when the Shaykh had unfurled his bold and daring stratagem, it was, for
Arsenov, the moment of revelation. He could vividly see the future the Shaykh was
holding out to them like a ripe fruit. Gripped by the flash of supernal illumination, he had
looked at Khalid Murat for confirmation, had seen instead the bitter truth. Khalid could
not see past the borders of his homeland, could not understand that regaining the
homeland was, in a way, secondary. Arsenov realized that the Chechens needed to gain
power not only to throw off the yoke of the Russian infidel but to establish their place in
the Islamic world, to gain the respect of the other Muslim nations. The Chechens were
Sunnis who had embraced the teachings of the Sufi mystics, personified by the zikr, the

remembrance of God, the common ritual involving chanted prayer and rhythmic dance
that achieved a shared trancelike state during which the eye of God appeared to the
assembled. Sunni, being as monolithic as other religions, abhorred, feared and therefore
reviled those who deviated even slightly from its strict central doctrine. Mysticism, divine
or otherwise, was anathema. Nineteenth-century thinking, in every sense of the phrase,
Arsenov thought bitterly.
Since the day of the assassination, the long-dreamed-of moment when he had become
the new leader of the Chechen freedom fighters, Arsenov had lived in a feverish almosthallucinatory state. He slept heavily but not restfully, for his slumber was filled with
nightmares in which he was trying to find something or someone through mazes of rubble
and was defeated. As a consequence, he was edgy and short with his subordinates; he
tolerated no excuses whatsoever. Only Zina had the power to calm him; her alchemical
touch allowed him to return from the strange limbo into which he had somehow receded.
The twinge of his wound brought him back to the present. He stared out the window at
the ancient streets, watched with an envy that bordered on agony as people went about
their business without hindrance, without the slightest trace of fear. He hated them, each
and every one who in the course of their free and easy lives gave not one thought to the
desperate struggle he and his people had been engaged in since the 1700s.
"What is it, my love?" A frown of concern crossed Zina's face.
"My legs ache. I grow weary of sitting, that's all."
"I know you. The tragedy of Murat's murder hasn't left you, despite our vengeance.
Thirty-five Russian soldiers went to their graves in retaliation for the murder of Khalid
Murat."
"Not just Murat," Arsenov said. "Our men. We lost seventeen men to Russian
treachery."
"You've rooted out the traitor, shot him yourself in front of the sublieutenants."
"To show them what awaits all traitors to the cause. The judgment was swift, the
punishment hard. This is our fate, Zina. There aren't enough tears to shed for our people.
Look at us. Lost and dispersed, hiding in the Caucasus, more than one hundred fifty
thousand Chechens living as refugees."
Zina did not stop Hasan as he enumerated once again this agonizing history because
these stories needed to be repeated as often as possible. They were the history books of
the Chechens.
Arsenov's fists went white, his nails drawing crescents of blood from beneath the skin
of his palms. "Ah, to have a weapon more deadly than an AK-47, more powerful than a
packet of C4!"
"Soon, soon, my love," Zina crooned softly in her deep, musical voice. "The Shaykh
has proved to be our greatest friend. Look how much aid his organization has provided
our people in just the last year; look how much coverage his press people have gotten us
in international magazines and newspapers."
"And still the Russian yoke is around our necks," Arsenov growled. "Still we die by
the hundreds."
"The Shaykh has promised us a weapon that will change all that."

"He's promised us the world." Arsenov wiped grit out of his eye. "The time for
promises is over. Let us now see the proof of his covenant."
The limousine the Shaykh had sent for the Chechens turned off the motorway at
Kalmankrt Boulevard, which took them over the Arpad Bridge, the Danube with its
heavy barges and brightly painted pleasure craft a dazzle below them. Zina glanced down.
To one side were the breathtaking domed and needle-spired Gothic stone edifices of the
Houses of Parliament; on the other was thickly forested Margaret Island, within which
was the luxe Danubius Grand Hotel, where crisp white sheets and a thick down comforter
were awaiting them. Zina, hard as armor plate during the day, reveled in her nights in
Budapest, never more so than in the luxury of the huge hotel bed. She saw in this feast of
pleasure no betrayal of her ascetic existence but rather a brief respite from hardship and
degradation, a reward like a wafer of Belgian chocolate slipped beneath the tongue, there
in secret to melt in a cloud of ecstasy.
The limo nosed into the car park in the basement level of the Human-istas, Ltd.
building. As they got out of the car, Zina took the large rectangular package from the
driver. Uniformed guards checked the pair's passports against photos in the data bank of
their computer terminal, gave them laminated ID tags and ushered them into a rather
grand bronze-and-glass elevator.
Spalko received them in his office. By this time the sun was high in the sky, beating
the river to a sheet of molten brass. He embraced them both, asked after the comfort of
their flight, the ease of their trip in from Ferih-egy Airport and the status of Arsenov's
bullet wound. When the amenities had been dispensed with, they went into an adjacent
room, paneled in honey-toned pecan wood, where a table had been set with crisp white
linen and sparkling dinnerware. Spalko had had a meal prepared, Western food. Steak,
lobster, three different vegetables—all the Chechens' favorites. And not a potato
anywhere in evidence. Potatoes were often all Arsenov and Zina had to eat for days on
end. Zina put the package on an empty chair, and they sat at the table.
"Shaykh," Arsenov said, "as always, we're overwhelmed by the largesse of your
hospitality."
Spalko inclined his head. He was pleased with the name he had given himself in their
world, which meant the Saint, friend of God. It struck the right note of reverence and awe,
an exalted shepherd to his flock.
He rose now and opened a bottle of powerful Polish vodka, which he poured into three
glasses. He lifted his and they followed suit. "In memory of Khalid Murat, a great leader,
a powerful warrior, a grim adversary," he intoned solemnly in the Chechen fashion. "May
Allah grant him the glory he has earned in blood and courage. May the tales of his
prowess as a leader and as a man be told and retold among all the faithful." They downed
the fiery liquor in one quick gulp.
Arsenov stood, refilled the glasses. He raised his glass, and the others followed suit.
"To the Shaykh, friend of the Chechens, who will lead us to our rightful place in the new
order of the world." They drank down the vodka.
Zina made to rise, doubtless to make her own toast, but Arsenov stayed her with a hand
on her arm. The restraining gesture did not fail to catch Spalko's attention. What
interested him most was Zina's response. He could see past her veiled expression to her

seething core. There were many injustices in the world, he knew, on every scale
imaginable. It seemed to him peculiar and not a little perverse that human beings could be
outraged by injustice on a grand scale, all the while missing the small wrongs that were
daily visited on individuals. Zina fought side by side with the men; why, then, should she
not have an opportunity to raise her voice in a toast of her own choosing? Rage seethed
within her; Spalko liked that—he knew how to use another person's anger.
"My compatriots, my friends." His eyes were sparking with conviction. "To the
meeting of sorrowful past, desperate present and glorious future. We stand on the brink of
tomorrow!"
They began to eat, speaking of general and inconsequential matters just as if they were
at a rather informal dinner party. And yet an air of anticipation, of incipient change, had
crept into the room. They kept their eyes on their plates or on one another, as if now so
close to it, they were reluctant to look at the gathering storm that was pressing in upon
them. At length, they were finished.
"It's time," the Shaykh said. Arsenov and Zina rose to stand before him.
Arsenov bowed his head. "One who dies for the love of the material world dies a
hypocrite. One who dies for the love of the hereafter dies an ascetic. But one who dies for
the love of the Truth dies a Sufi."
He turned to Zina, who opened the package they had brought with them from Grozny.
Inside were three cloaks. She handed one to Arsenov, who put it on. She donned hers.
The third Arsenov held in his hands as he faced the Shaykh.
"The kherqeh is the garment of honor of the dervish," Arsenov intoned. "It symbolizes
the divine nature and attributes."
Zina said, "The cloak is sewn with the needle of devotion and the thread of the selfless
remembrance of God."
The Shaykh bowed his head and said, "La illaha ill Allah" There is no God but God,
who is One.
Arsenov and Zina repeated, "La illaha ill Allah" Then the Chechen rebel leader placed
the kherqeh around the Shaykh's shoulders. "It is enough for most men to have lived
according to the Shariah, the law of Islam, in surrender to the divine will, to die in grace
and to enter into Paradise," he said. "But there are those of us who yearn for the divine
here and now and whose love for God compels us to seek the path of inwardness. We are
Sufi."
Spalko felt the weight of the dervish cloak and said, "O thou soul which are at peace,
return unto thy Lord, with gladness that is thine in Him and His in thee. Enter thou
among My slaves. Enter thou My Paradise."
Arsenov, moved by this quotation from the Qur'an, took Zina's hand, and together they
knelt before the Shaykh. In a call-and-response three centuries old, they recited a solemn
oath of obedience. Spalko produced a knife, handed it to them. Both in turn cut
themselves and, in a stemmed glass, offered up to him their blood. In this manner, they
became murids, disciples of the Shaykh, bound to him in both word and deed.
Then, even though it was painful for Arsenov with his wounded thigh, they sat crosslegged, facing one another, and in the manner of the Naqshibandi Sufis, they performed
the zikr, the ecstatic union with God. They placed their right hands on their left thighs,

left hands atop right wrists. Arsenov began to move his head and neck to the right in the
arc of a semicircle, and Zina and Spalko followed in perfect time to Arsenov's soft,
almost sensual chanting: "Save me, my Lord, from the evil eye of envy and jealousy,
which falleth upon Thy bountiful Gifts." They made the same movement to the left.
"Save me, my Lord, from falling into the hands of the playful children of earth, lest they
might use me in their games; they might play with me and then break me in the end, as
children destroy their toys." Back and forth, back and forth. "Save me, my Lord, from all
manner of injury that cometh from the bitterness of my adversaries and from the
ignorance of my loving friends."
The chanted prayers and the movement became one, merging into an ecstatic whole in
the presence of God....
Much later, Spalko led them down a back corridor to a small stainless-steel elevator,
which took them down below the basement into the very bedrock in which the building
was set.
They entered a vaulted, high-ceilinged room, crisscrossed by iron struts. The low hiss
of the climate control was the only sound they heard. A number of crates had been
stacked along one wall. It was to these that Spalko led them. He handed a crowbar to
Arsenov, watched with a good measure of satisfaction as the terrorist leader cracked open
the nearest crate, stared down at the gleaming sets of AK-47 assault rifles. Zina took one
up, inspected it with care and precision. She nodded to Arsenov, who opened another
crate, which held a dozen shoulder-held rocket-launchers.
"This is the most advanced ordnance in the Russian arsenal," Spalko said.
"But what price?" Arsenov said.
Spalko spread his hands. "What price would be appropriate if this weaponry helped
you gain your freedom?"
"How do you put a price on freedom?" Arsenov said with a frown.
"The answer is you cannot. Hasan, freedom has no known price tag. It is bought with
the blood and the indomitable hearts of people like yourselves." He moved his eyes to
Zina's face. "These are yours—all of them—to use as you see fit to secure your borders,
make those around you take notice." At last, Zina looked up at him, through long lashes.
Their eyes locked, sparked, though their expressions remained impassive.
As if responding to Spalko's scrutiny, Zina said, "Even this weaponry won't gain us
entry to the Reykjavik Summit."
Spalko nodded, the corners of his mouth turning up slightly. "True enough. The
international security is far too comprehensive. An armed assault would result in nothing
but our own deaths. However, I have a plan that will not only gain us access to the
Oskjuhlid Hotel but will allow us to kill every person inside without exposing ourselves.
Within hours of the event, everything you have dreamed of for centuries will be yours."
"Khalid Murat was afraid of the future, afraid of what we, as Chechens, can
accomplish." The fever of righteousness colored Arsenov's face. "We have been too long
ignored by the world. Russia beats us into the ground while their comrades in arms, the
Americans, stand by and do nothing to save us. Billions of American dollars flow into the
Middle East but to Chechnya not a ruble!"

Spalko had assumed the self-satisfied air of a professor who sees his prize pupil
perform well. His eyes glittered balefully. "That will all change. Five days from now all
the world will be at your feet. Power will be yours, as well as the respect of those who
have spit on you, abandoned you. Russia, the Islamic world and all of the West,
especially the United States!"
"We're speaking here of changing the entire world order, Zina," Arsenov fairly shouted.
"But how!" Zina asked. "How is this possible*."
"Meet me in Nairobi in three days' time," Spalko replied, "and you'll see for yourself."
The water, dark, deep, alive with an unnameable horror, closes over his head. He is
sinking. No matter how hard he struggles, how desperately he strikes out for the surface,
he feels himself spiraling down, as if weighted with lead. Then he looks down, sees a
thick rope, slimy with weed, tied around his left ankle. He cannot see what is at the end of
the rope because it disappears into the blackness below him. But whatever it is must be
heavy, must be dragging him down, because the rope is taut. Desperately, he reaches
down, his bloated fingers scrabbling to free himself, and the Buddha drifts free, spinning
slowly, falling away from him into the unfathomable darkness....
Khan awoke with a start, as always, racked by a horrible sense of loss. He lay amid the
humid tangle of sheets. For a time, the recurring nightmare still pulsed evilly in his mind.
Reaching down, he touched his left ankle as if to reassure himself that the rope was not
tied to him. Then, gingerly, almost reverently, he moved his fingers up the taut, slick
muscles of his abdomen and chest until he touched the small carved stone Buddha that
hung around his neck by a thin gold chain. He never took it off, even when he slept. Of
course it was there. It was always there. It was a talisman, even though he had tried to
convince himself that he didn't believe in talismans.
With a small sound of disgust, he rose, then padded into the bathroom, splashed cold
water over his head. He turned on the light, blinking for a moment. Thrusting his head
close to the mirror, he inspected his reflection, looking at himself as if for the first time.
He grunted, relieved himself, then, turning on a table lamp, sat on the edge of the bed,
read again the sparse dossier Spalko had given him. Nothing in it gave the slightest hint
that David Webb possessed the abilities Khan had seen. He touched the black-and-blue
mark on his throat, thought of the net Webb had fashioned out of vines and cleverly set.
He tore up the single sheet of the dossier. It was useless, less than useless, since it had led
him to underestimate his target. And there were other implications, just as immediate.
Spalko had given him information that was either incomplete or incorrect.
He suspected that Spalko knew precisely who and what David Webb was. Khan
needed to know if Spalko had set some gambit in motion that involved Webb. He had his
own plans for David Webb and he was quite determined that no one—not even Stepan
Spalko—got in the way.
With a sigh, he turned off the light and lay back down, but his mind was unprepared
for sleep. He found his entire body abuzz with speculation. Up until making the deal for
his last assignment with Spalko, he had had no idea David Webb even existed, much less
was still alive. He doubted he would have taken the assignment had not Spalko dangled
Webb in front of his face. He must have known that Khan would find the prospect of
finding Webb irresistible. For some time now, working for Spalko had made Khan

uncomfortable. Increasingly, Spalko seemed to believe that he owned Khan, and Spalko,
Khan was sure, was a megalomaniac.
In the jungles of Cambodia, where he had been forced to make his way as a child and
teenager, he had had more than a little experience with megalomaniacs. The hot, humid
weather, the constant chaos of war, the uncertainty of daily life all combined to drive
people to the edge of madness. In that malevolent environment, the weak died, the strong
survived; everyone was in some elemental fashion changed.
As he lay in bed, Khan fingered the scars on his body. It was a form of ritual, a
superstition, perhaps, a method of keeping him safe from harm— not from the violence
one adult perpetrates on another, but from the creeping, nameless terror a child feels in
the dead of night. Children, waking from such nightmares, run to their parents, crawl into
the warmth and comfort of their bed and are soon fast asleep. But Khan had no parents,
no one to comfort him. On the contrary, he had been constantly obliged to free himself
from the clutches of addle-brained adults who thought of him only as a source of money
or sex. Slavery was what he had known for many years, from both the Caucasians and the
Asians he had had the misfortune to stumble across. He belonged to neither world and
they knew it. He was a half-breed and, as such, reviled, cursed at, beaten, abused, laid
low in every manner a human being can be degraded.
And still he had persevered. His goal, from day to day, had devolved simply to
surviving. But he had learned from bitter experience that escape was not enough, that
those who had enslaved him would come after him, punish him severely. Twice, he had
almost died. That was when he understood that more was required of him if he was to
survive. He would have to kill or, eventually, he would be killed.
It was just before five when the Agency assault team stole into the motel from their
position at the highway roadblock. They had been alerted to the presence of Jason Bourne
by the night manager, who had awakened from a Xanax-induced doze to see Bourne's
face staring at him from the TV screen. He had pinched himself to make sure he wasn't
dreaming, had taken a shot of cheap rye, and made his call.
The team leader had called for the motel's security lights to be switched off so the team
could make their approach in darkness. As they began to move into position, however,
the refrigerated truck at the opposite end of the motel started up and switched on its
headlights, catching some of the team in its powerful beams. The team leader waved
frantically to the hapless driver, then ran to his side of the truck, told him to haul ass out
of there. The driver, goggle-eyed at the sight of the team, did as he was requested, turning
out his lights until he was clear of the parking lot and rolling down the highway.
The team leader signed to his men and they headed directly toward Bourne's room. At
his silent command two broke off, headed around the back. The leader gave them twenty
seconds to position themselves before he gave the order for them to don gas masks. Two
of his men knelt, fired canisters of tear gas through the front window of the room. The
leader's extended arm came down and his men rushed the room, slamming open the door.
Gas whooshed out as they scuttled in, machine guns at the ready. The TV was on, the
sound muted. CNN was showing the face of their quarry. The remains of a hasty meal
were strewn on the stained, worn carpet and the bed was stripped. The room was
abandoned.

Inside the refrigerated truck hastening away from the motel, Bourne, wrapped in the
bedding, lay amid wooden cases containing plastic baskets of strawberries stacked up
almost to the ceiling. He had managed to get himself into a position above floor level, the
crates on either side holding him in place. When he had entered the rear of the truck, he
had locked the door behind him. All such refrigeration trucks had a safety mechanism
that could open and lock the rear door from the inside to ensure no one inadvertently got
trapped. Switching on his flashlight for a moment, he had made out the center aisle, wide
enough for a man to pass through. On the upper right-hand wall was the exhaust grille for
the refrigeration compressor.
All at once, he tensed. The truck was slowing now as it approached the roadblock, then
it stopped completely. The flashpoint of extreme danger had arrived.
There was utter silence for perhaps five minutes, then, abruptly, the harsh sound of the
rear door being opened. Voices came to him. "You pick up any hitchhikers?" a cop said.
"Uh-uh," Guy, the truck driver, answered.
"Here, look at this photo. Seen this fella on the side of the road maybe?" "No, sir.
Never seen the man. What'd he do?" "What you got in there?" Another cop's voice.
"Fresh strawberries," Guy said. "Listen, Officers, have a heart. It ain't good for them to
have the door open like this. What rots comes outta my pay."
Someone grunted. A powerful flashlight beam played along the center aisle, swept
across the floor just beneath the spot where Bourne lay suspended amid the strawberries.
"Okay," the first cop said, "close it up, buddy." The flashlight beam snapped off and
the door slammed shut. Bourne waited until the truck was in gear, rolling at speed down
the highway to D.C., before extricating himself. His mind was buzzing. The cops must
have shown Guy the same photo of David Webb that was being broadcast on CNN.
Within a half hour, the smooth highway driving had given way to the constant stop and
start of urban streets with traffic lights. It was time to exit. Bourne went to the door,
pushed on the safety lever. It wouldn't move. He tried again, this time with more force.
Cursing under his breath, he snapped on the flashlight he'd taken from Conklin's house.
In the bright circle of the beam, he saw that the mechanism had jammed. He was locked
in.

CHAPTER FIVE
The Director of Central Intelligence was in a dawn conference with Roberta AlonzoOrtiz, the National Security Advisor. They met in the president's Situation Room, a
circular space in the bowels of the White House. Many floors above them were the woodpaneled, beautifully dentiled rooms most people associated with this storied, historical
building, but down here the full muscle and might of the Pentagon oligarchs held sway.
Like the great temples of the ancient civilizations, the Sit Room had been built to last for
centuries. Carved out of the old subbasement, its proportions were intimidating, as
befitted such a monument to invincibility.

Alonzo-Ortiz, the DCI and their respective staffs—as well as select members of the
Secret Service—were going over, for the hundredth time, the security plans for the
terrorism summit in Reykjavik. Detailed schematics for the Oskjuhlid Hotel were up on a
projection screen, along with notes on security issues regarding entrances, exits, elevators,
roof, windows and the like. A direct video hook-up to the hotel had been established, so
that Jamie Hull, the DCI's emissary-in-place, could participate in the briefing.
"No margin for error will be tolerated," Alonzo-Ortiz said. She was a formidablelooking woman with jet-black hair and bright, keen eyes. "Every aspect of this summit
must go off like clockwork," she continued. "Any breach of security no matter how
minuscule will have disastrous effects. It would destroy what coin the president has spent
eighteen months building up with the principal Islamic states. I don't have to tell any of
you that beneath the facade of cooperation lurks an innate distrust of Western values, the
Judeo-Christian ethic and all that stands for. Any hint that the president has deceived
them will have the most dire and immediate consequences." She looked slowly around
the table. It was one of her special gifts that when addressing a group she made each and
every member believe that she was speaking only to him. "Make no mistake, gentlemen.
We are talking about nothing less than a global war here, a massed jihad such as we have
never before seen and, quite possibly, cannot imagine."
She was about to turn the briefing over to Jamie Hull when a young, slim man entered
the room, went silently over to the DCI, handed him a sealed envelope.
"My apologies, Dr. Alonzo-Ortiz," he said as he slit open the envelope. He read the
contents impassively, though his heart rate had doubled. The National Security Advisor
did not like her briefings interrupted. Aware that she was glaring at him, he pushed back
his chair and rose.
Alonzo-Ortiz directed at him a smile so compressed her lips fairly disappeared. "I trust
you have sufficient cause to leave us so abruptly."
"I do, indeed, Dr. Alonzo-Ortiz." The DCI, though an old hand and, therefore, a
wielder of his own power, knew better than to butt heads with the one person the
president relied on most. He remained on his best behavior even though he deeply
resented Roberta Alonzo-Ortiz both because she had usurped his traditional role with the
president and because she was a woman. For these reasons, he employed what little
power was at his command—the withholding of what she wanted most to know: the
nature of the emergency dire enough to take him away.
The National Security Advisor's smile tightened further. "In that event, I would
appreciate a full briefing of the crisis, whatever it may be, as soon as is practicable."
"Absolutely," the DCI said, beating a hasty retreat. As the thick door to the Sit Room
swung shut behind him, he added, dryly, "Your Highness," eliciting a gust of laughter
from the field agent his office had employed as a messenger.
It took the DCI less than fifteen minutes to return to HQ where a meeting of Agency
directorate heads was awaiting his arrival. The subject: the murders of Alexander Conklin
and Dr. Morris Panov. The prime suspect: Jason Bourne. These were whey-faced men in
impeccably tailored conservative suits, rep ties, polished brogues. Not for them striped
shirts, colored collars, the passing fads of fashion. Used to striding the corridors of power
inside the Beltway, they were as immutable as their clothes. They were conservative

thinkers from conservative colleges, scions from the correct families who, early on, had
been directed by their fathers to the offices, and thence the confidences, of the right
people—leaders with vision and energy who knew how to get the job done. The nexus in
which they now sat was a tightly held secret world, but the tentacles that fanned out from
it stretched far and wide.
As soon as the DCI entered the conference room, the lights were dimmed. On a screen
appeared the forensic photos of the bodies in situ.
"For the love of God, take those down!" the DCI shouted. "They're an obscenity. We
shouldn't be viewing these men like that."
Martin Lindros, the DDCI, pressed a button and the screen went blank. "To bring
everyone up to date, yesterday we confirmed that it was David Webb's car in Conklin's
driveway." He paused as the Old Man cleared his throat.
"Let's call a spade a spade." The DCI leaned forward, fists upon the gleaming table.
"The world at large may know this . .. this man as David Webb but here he is known as
Jason Bourne. We will use that name."
"Yessir," Lindros said, determined not to run afoul of the DCI's exceedingly black
mood. He barely needed to consult his notes, so fresh and vivid in his mind were the
findings. "W—Bourne was last seen on the Georgetown campus approximately an hour
before the murders. A witness observed him hurrying toward his car. We can assume he
drove directly to Alex Conklin's house. Bourne was definitely in the house at or around
the time of the murders. His fingerprints are on a glass of half-finished Scotch found in
the media room."
"What about the gun?" the DCI asked. "Is it the murder weapon?" Lindros nodded.
"Absolutely confirmed by ballistics." "And it's Bourne's, you're certain, Martin?"
Lindros consulted a photocopied sheet, spun it across the table to the DCI.
"Registration confirms that the murder weapon belongs to David Webb. Our David
Webb."
"Sonuvabitch!" The DCI's hands were trembling. "Are the bastard's fingerprints on it?"
"The gun was wiped clean," Lindros said, consulting another sheet. "No fingerprints at
all."
"The mark of a professional." The DCI looked abruptly weary. It wasn't easy to lose an
old friend.
"Yessir. Absolutely."
"And Bourne?" the DCI growled. It appeared painful for him even to utter the name.
"Early this morning we received a tip that Bourne was holed up in a Virginia motel
near one of the roadblocks," Lindros said. "The area was immediately cordoned off, an
assault team sent into the motel. If Bourne was in fact there, he'd already fled, slipped
through the cordon. He's vanished into thin air."
"Goddammit!" Color had risen to the DCI's cheeks.
Lindros' assistant came silently in, handed him a sheet of paper. He scanned it for a
moment, then looked up. "Earlier, I sent a team to Webb's home, in the event he turned
up there or contacted his wife. The team found the house locked up and empty. There's

no sign of Bourne's wife or two children. Subsequent investigation revealed that she
appeared at their school and pulled them out of class with no explanation."
"That seals it!" The DCI seemed almost apoplectic. "In every area he's a step ahead of
us because he had these murders planned out beforehand!" During the short, swift drive
to Langley, he'd allowed his emotions to get the better of him. Between Alex's murder
and Alonzo-Ortiz's maneuvering, he had entered the Agency briefing in a rage. Now,
presented with the forensic evidence, he was more than ready to convict.
"It's clear that Jason Bourne has gone rogue." The Old Man, still standing, fairly shook
now. "Alexander Conklin was an old and trusted friend. I cannot remember or list the
number of times he put his reputation—his very life—on the line for this organization, for
his country. He was a true patriot in every sense of the word, a man of whom we were all
justly proud." Lindros, for his own part, was considering the number of times he could
remember and list when the Old Man had ranted at Conklin's cowboy tactics, his rogue
missions, his secret agendas. It was all well and good to eulogize the dead, but, he
thought, in this business it was downright foolish to ignore the dangerous tendencies of
agents past and present. That, of course, included Jason Bourne. He was a sort of sleeper
agent, the worst kind really—one not fully under his own control. In the past, he had been
activated by circumstance, not by his own choosing. Lindros knew very little about Jason
Bourne, an oversight he was determined to rectify the moment this briefing was
adjourned.
"If Alexander Conklin had one weakness, one blind spot, it was Jason Bourne," the
DCI went on. "Years before he met and married his current wife, Marie, he lost the whole
of his first family—his Thai wife and two kids—in an attack in Phnom Penh. The man
was half-mad with grief and remorse when Alex picked him up off the street in Saigon
and trained him. Years later, even after Alex enlisted the aid of Morris Panov, there were
problems controlling the asset—despite Dr. Panov's regular reports to the contrary.
Somehow, he too fell under the influence of Jason Bourne.
"I warned Alex over and over, I begged him to bring Bourne in to be evaluated by our
team of forensic psychiatrists, but he refused. Alex, God rest his soul, could be a stubborn
man; he believed in Bourne."
The DCFs face was slick with sweat, his eyes wide as he glanced around the room.
"And what is the result of that belief? Both men have been gunned down like dogs by the
very asset they sought to control. The simple truth is that Bourne is uncontrollable. And
he is deadly, a poisonous viper." The DCI slammed his fist down on the conference table.
"I will not have these heinous, cold-blooded murders go unpunished. I'm authorizing a
worldwide sanction drawn up, ordering Jason Bourne's immediate termination."
Bourne shivered, by now chilled through and through. He glanced up, played his beam
over the refrigeration vent. Heading back down the center aisle, he clambered up the
right-hand stack of crates, crawled his way across the top of the stacks until he came to
the grate. Flipping open the switchblade, he used the spine of the blade to unscrew the
grille. The soft light of dawn flowed into the interior. There appeared to be just enough
room for him to squeeze through. He hoped.
He rolled his shoulders in toward his chest, squeezing himself into the aperture, and
began to wriggle from side to side. All went well for the first several inches or so, and

then his forward progress abruptly stopped. He tried to move but couldn't. He was stuck.
He exhaled all the air out of his lungs, allowed his upper body to go slack. He pushed
with his feet and legs. A crate slid and tumbled, but he had inched forward. He lowered
his legs until his feet found purchase on the crates below. Locking the heels of his shoes
against the upper bar, he pushed again and again he moved. By slowly and carefully
repeating this maneuver he was at last able to get his head and shoulders through. He
bunked up into the candy pink sky, where fluffy clouds rose up, shifting shapes as he
rolled by beneath them. Reaching up, he grabbed the corner of the roof, levered himself
all the way out of the semi and onto its roof.
At the next stoplight he jumped down, tucking his lead shoulder in, rolling to cushion
his fall. He rose, gained the sidewalk, dusted himself off. The street was deserted. He
offered the unsuspecting Guy a brief salute as the semi drove off in a blue haze of diesel
fumes.
He was on the outskirts of D.C., in the poor northeast district. Light was coming into
the sky, the long shadows of dawn retreating before the sun. The hum of traffic could be
heard in the distance, as well as the wail of a police siren. He breathed deeply. Beneath
the urban stink, there was for him something fresh in the air, the exhilaration of freedom
after the long night's struggle to remain hidden, to remain free.
He walked until he saw the fluttering of faded red, white and blue pennants. The usedcar lot was shut down for the night. He walked onto the deserted lot, chose a car at
random and switched its plates with the car next to it. He jimmied the lock, opened the
driver's side door and hotwired the ignition. A moment later, he was driving out of the lot
and down the street.
He parked in front of a diner whose chrome-plated facade was a relic of the fifties. A
gigantic cup of coffee sat atop the roof, its neon lights long ago burned out. Inside, it was
steamy. The smell of coffee grounds and hot oil was ingrained into every surface. To his
left was a long Formica counter and a row of vinyl-topped chromium stools; to his right,
against the bank of sun-streaked windows, were a line of booths, each one with one of
those individual jukeboxes that held the cards of all the songs that could be played for a
quarter.
Bourne's white skin was silently remarked upon by the dark faces that turned as the
door shut behind him with a little tinkle of a bell. No one returned his smile. Some
appeared indifferent to him, but others of a different nature seemed to interpret his
presence as an evil omen of things to come.
Aware of the hostile glares, he slid into a lumpy booth. A waitress with a frizz of
orange hair and a face like Eartha Kitt dropped a fly-blown menu in front of him, filled
his cup with steaming coffee. Bright, overly made-up eyes in a care-worn face regarded
him for a time with curiosity and something more—compassion, perhaps. "Don't you
mind the stares, sugah," she breathed. "They're scared of you."
He ate an indifferent breakfast: eggs, bacon and home fries, washed down with the
astringent coffee. But he needed the protein and the caffeine laid to rest his exhaustion, at
least temporarily.
The waitress refilled his cup and he sipped, marking time until Lincoln Fine Tailors
opened. But he was not idle. He dug out the notepad he had picked off the table in Alex's
media room, once again looked at the imprint left on the top sheet. NX 20. It had the ring

of something experimental, something ominous, but really it could be anything, including
a new-model computer.
Glancing up, he observed the denizens of the neighborhood drifting in and out,
discussing Welfare checks, drug scores, police beatings, the sudden deaths of family
members, the illness of friends in jail. This was their life, more alien to him than life in
Asia or Micronesia. The atmosphere inside the diner was darkened by their rage and
sorrow.
Once, a police cruiser slid slowly by like a shark skirting a reef. All motion in the diner
ceased, as if this significant moment was a frame in a photographer's lens. He turned his
head away and looked at the waitress. She was watching the taillights of the cruiser
disappear down the block. An audible sigh of relief swept the diner. Bourne experienced
his own sense of relief. It seemed that, after all, he was in the company of fellow travelers
in shadow.
His thoughts turned to the man who was stalking him. His face had an Asian cast, and
yet not wholly so. Was there something familiar about it— the bold line of the nose,
which was not Asian at all, or the shape of the full lips, which was very much so? Was he
someone from Bourne's past, from Vietnam? But, no, that was impossible. Judging by his
appearance, he was in his late twenties at most, meaning he couldn't have been more than
five or six when Bourne had been there. Who was he, then, and what did he want? The
questions continued to haunt Bourne. Abruptly, he set down his half-empty cup. The
coffee was beginning to burn a hole in his stomach.
Not long after, he returned to the stolen car, switched on the radio, spun the dial until
he came to a news announcer talking about the terrorism summit, followed by a brief
rundown first of the national news, then the local items. First on the list were the murders
of Alex Conklin and Mo Panov but, strangely, no new information was forthcoming.
"More news upcoming," the announcer said, "but first this important message...."
"... this important message'' At that moment, the office in Paris with its view down the
Champs-Elyse'es to the Arc de Triomphe came roaring back to him, the memory
sweeping away the diner and those who surrounded him. There was a chocolate-colored
chair at his side from which he had just risen. In his right hand a glass of cut-crystal half
full of the amber liquid. A voice, deep and rich, full of melody, was speaking, something
about the time it would take to get everything Bourne needed. "Not to worry, my friend,"
the voice said, the English blurred by the heavy cast of its French accent, "I'm meant to
give you this important message."
In the theater of his mind, he turned, straining to see the face of the man who had
spoken, but all he saw was a blank wall. The memory had evaporated like the scent of the
Scotch, leaving Bourne back, staring bleakly out the grimy windows of the broken-down
diner.
A spasm of fury drove Khan to pick up his cell phone and call Spalko. It took some
time, and a bit of doing on his part, but at length he was put through.
"To what do I owe this honor, Khan?" Spalko said in his ear. Listening hard, Khan
heard the slight slur in his voice and determined that he had been drinking. His
knowledge of the habits of his sometime employer went deeper than Spalko himself
might have realized, if he'd wanted to consider it at all. He knew, for instance, that

Spalko liked drink, cigarettes and women, though not necessarily in that order. His
capacity for all three was immense. He thought now that if Spalko was even half as drunk
as he suspected, he would have an advantage. Where Spalko was concerned, that was rare.
"The dossier you gave me appears incorrect, or at the very least incomplete."
"And what leads you to that sorry conclusion?" The voice had instantaneously
hardened, like water into ice. Too late Khan knew the language he had used had been too
aggressive. Spalko might be a great thinker—a visionary even, as he doubtless considered
himself—but in the bedrock of his being he operated on instinct. So he had risen from his
semi-stupor to fight aggression with more of the same. He was possessed of a furious
temper quite at odds with his carefully cultivated public image. But then so much of him
thrived beneath the saccharine surface of his day-to-day life.
"Webb's behavior has been curious," Khan said softly.
"Oh? In what way?" Spalko's voice had returned to its slurring, lazy diction.
"He hasn't been acting like a college professor."
"I'm wondering why it matters. Haven't you killed him?"
"Not yet." Khan, sitting in his parked car, watched through the window glass as a bus
pulled into a stop across the street. The door opened with a sigh and people emerged: an
old man, two teenage boys, a mother and her toddler son.
"Well, that's a change of plan, isn't it?"
"You knew I meant to toy with him first."
"Certainly, but the question is for how long?"
There was a verbal chess match of sorts in progress, as delicate as it was fevered, and
Khan could only guess at its nature. What was it about Webb? Why had Spalko decided
to use him as a pawn for the double murder of the government men, Conklin and Panov?
Why, for that matter, had Spalko ordered them killed? Khan had no doubt this is what
had happened.
"Until I'm ready. Until he understands who's coming for him."
Khan's eyes followed the mother as she put her child down on the sidewalk. The boy
tottered a little as he walked and she laughed. His head tilted as he looked up at her and
he laughed, too, mimicking her pleasure. She took his small hand in hers.
"You're not having second thoughts, are you?"
Khan thought he detected a slight tautness, a tremor of intent, and all at once he
wondered whether Spalko was drunk at all. Khan considered asking him why it mattered
to him whether or not he killed David Webb but, after some consideration, rejected the
idea, fearing it might reveal his own concerns. "No, no second thoughts," Khan said.
"Because we're the same under the skin, you and I. Our nostrils dilate at the scent of
death."
Lost in thought and unsure how to respond, Khan closed his cell phone. He put his
hand up to the window, watched between his fingers as the woman walked her son down
the street. She took tiny steps, trying as best she could to match her gait to his wobbly one.
Spalko was lying to him, Khan knew that much. Just as he had been lying to Spalko.
For a moment, his eyes lost their focus and he was back in the jungles of Cambodia. He
had been with the Vietnamese gunrunner for over a year, tied up in a shack like a mad

dog, half-starved and beaten. The third time he had attempted to escape he had learned
his lesson, beating the unconscious gunrunner's head to a pulp with the spade-shaped
head of a shovel he used to dig latrine pits. He had spent ten days living off what he could
before he had been taken in by an American missionary by the name of Richard Wick.
He had been given food, clothing, a hot bath and a clean bed. In exchange, he responded
to the missionary's English lessons. As soon as he was able to read, he was given a Bible,
which he was required to memorize. In this way, he began to understand that in Wick's
view he was on the road to not salvation but to civilization. Once or twice, he tried to
explain to Wick the nature of Buddhism, but he was very young and the concepts he'd
been taught at an early age didn't seem so well formed when they emerged from his
mouth. Not that Wick would've been interested in any case. He held no truck with any
religion^ that didn't believe in God, didn't believe in Jesus the Savior.
Khan's eyes snapped back into focus. The mother was leading her toddler past the
chrome facade of the diner with the huge coffee cup on its roof. Just beyond and across
the street, Khan could see the man he knew as David Webb through the reflectionstreaked glass of a car window. He had to give Webb credit; he had led Khan on a
tortured path from the edge of the Conklin estate. Khan had seen the figure on the ridge
road, observing them. By the time he had scrambled up there after escaping from Webb's
clever trap, he had been too late to accost the man, but with his IR field glasses, he had
been able to follow Webb's progress onto the highway. He had been ready to follow
when Webb had been picked up. He watched Webb now, knowing what Spalko already
knew: that Webb was a very dangerous man. A man like that surely had no concern about
being the only Caucasian in the diner. He looked lonely, although Khan could not be sure,
loneliness being entirely alien to him.
His gaze turned again to the mother and child. Their laughter drifted back to him,
insubstantial as a dream.
Bourne arrived at Lincoln Fine Tailors in Alexandria at five minutes past nine. The
shop looked like all the other independently owned businesses in Old Town; that is to say,
it had a vaguely Colonial facade. He crossed the red-brick sidewalk, pushed open the
door, and went inside. The public area of the shop was divided in half by a waist-high
barrier made up of a counter on the left and cutting tables on the right. The sewing
machines were midway back behind the counter, manned by three Latinas who did not
even glance up when he entered. A thin man in shirtsleeves and open striped vest stood
behind the counter frowning down at something. He had a high, domed forehead, a fringe
of light brown hair, a face with sagging cheeks and muddy eyes. His glasses were pushed
up onto the crown of his scalp. He had a habit of pinching his hawklike nose. He paid no
attention to the door opening but looked up as Bourne approached the counter.
"Yes?" he said with an expectant air. "How can I help you?"
"You're Leonard Fine? I saw your name on the window outside."
"That's me," Fine said.
"Alex sent me."
The tailor blinked. "Who?"
"Alex Conklin," Bourne repeated. "My name is Jason Bourne." He looked around. No
one was paying them the slightest attention. The sound of the sewing machines made the
air sparkle and hum.

Very deliberately, Fine pulled his glasses down onto the narrow bridge of his nose. He
peered at Bourne with a decided intensity.
"I'm a friend of his," Bourne said, feeling the need to prompt the fellow.
"There are no articles of clothing here for a Mr. Conklin."
"I don't think he left any," Bourne said.
Fine pinched his nose, as if he were in pain. "A friend, you say?"
"For many years."
Without another word, Fine reached over, opened a door in the counter for Bourne to
step through. "Perhaps we should discuss this in my office." He led Bourne through a
door, down a dusty corridor reeking of sizing and spray starch.
The office wasn't much, a small cubicle with scuffed and pitted linoleum on the floor,
bare pipes running from floor to ceiling, a battered green metal desk with a swivel chair,
two stacks of cheap metal filing cabinets, piles of cardboard boxes. The smell of mold
and mildew rose like steam from the contents of the office. Behind the chair was a small
square window, so grimed it was impossible to see the alley beyond.
Fine went behind the desk, pulled out a drawer. "Drink?"
"It's a little early," Bourne said, "don't you think?"
"Yeah," Fine muttered. "Now that you mention it." He removed a gun from a drawer
and aimed it at Bourne's stomach. "The bullet won't kill you right away, but while you're
bleeding to death, you'll wish it had."
"There's no reason to get excited," Bourne said easily.
"But there's every reason." the tailor said. His eyes were set close together, making him
appear somewhat cross-eyed. "Conklin's dead and I heard you did it."
"I didn't," Bourne said.
"That's what you all say. Deny, deny, deny. It's the government's way, isn't it?" A
crafty smile crossed the other's face. "Sit down, Mr. Webb—or Bourne—whatever you're
calling yourself today."
Bourne looked up. "You're Agency."
"Not at all. I'm an independent operator. Unless Alex told them, I doubt if anyone
inside the Agency knows I even exist." The tailor's smile grew wider. "That's why Alex
came to me in the first place."
Bourne nodded. "I'd like to know about that."
"Oh, I have no doubt." Fine reached for the phone on his desk. "On the other hand,
when your own people get hold of you, you'll be too busy answering their questions to
care about anything else."
"Don't do that," Bourne said sharply.
Fine halted with the receiver in midair. "Give me a reason."
"I didn't kill Alex. I'm trying to find out who did."
"But you did kill him. According to the bulletin I read, you were at his house at the
time he was shot to death. Did you see anyone else there?"
"No, but Alex and Mo Panov were dead when I arrived."

"Bullshit. Why did you kill him, I wonder." Fine's eyes narrowed. "I imagine it was
because of Dr. Schiffer."
"I never heard of Dr. Schiffer."
The tailor emitted a harsh laugh. "More bullshit. And I suppose you never heard of
DARPA."
"Of course I have," Bourne said. "It stands for Defense Advanced Research Projects
Agency. Is that where Dr. Schiffer works?"
With a sound of disgust, Fine said, "I've had enough of this." When he momentarily
took his eyes off Bourne to dial a number, Bourne lunged at him.
The DCI was in his capacious corner office, on the phone with Jamie Hull. Brilliant
sunlight spilled in the window, firing the jewel tones of the carpet. Not that the
magnificent play of colors had any effect on the DCI. He was still in one of his black
moods. Bleakly, he looked at the photos of himself with presidents in the Oval Office,
foreign leaders in Paris, Bonn and Dakar, entertainers in L.A. and Vegas, evangelical
preachers in Atlanta and Salt Lake City, even, absurdly, the Dalai Lama in his perpetual
smile and saffron robes, on a visit to New York City. These pictures not only failed to
rouse him from his gloom but made him feel the years of his life, as if they were layers of
chain-mail weighing him down.
"It's a fucking nightmare, sir," Hull was saying from far-off Reykjavik. "First off,
setting up security in conjunction with the Russians and Arabs is like chasing your tail. I
mean, half the time I don't know what the hell they're saying and the other half I don't
trust the interpreters—ours or theirs—are telling me exactly what they're saying."
"You should have taken foreign language courses in grad school, Jamie. Just get on
with it. I'll send you other interpreters, if you like."
"Really? And where would be we getting them? We've excised all the Arabists, haven't
we?"
The DCI sighed. That was a problem, of course. Almost all the Arab-speaking
intelligence officers they'd had on their payroll had been deemed sympathetic to the
Islamic cause, always shouting down the hawks, trying to explain how peace-loving most
Islamics really were. Tell that to the Israelis. "We've got a whole crop of new ones due
here day after tomorrow from the Center for the Study of Intelligence. I'll have a couple
sourced out to you ASAP."
"That's not all, sir."
The DCI scowled, vexed that he heard no hint of gratitude in the other's voice. "What
now?" he snapped. What if he removed all the photos? he wondered. Would that improve
the lugubrious atmosphere in here?
"Not to complain, sir, but I'm trying my damnedest to establish proper security
measures in a foreign country with no particular allegiance to the United States. We don't
give them aid, so they aren't beholden to us. I invoke the president's name and what do I
get? Blank stares. That makes my job triply difficult. I'm a member of the most powerful
nation on the planet. I know more about security than everyone in Iceland put together.
Where's the respect I'm supposed to—"

The intercom buzzed, and with a certain amount of satisfaction, the Old Man put Hull
on hold. "What is it?" he barked into the intercom.
"Sorry to bother you, sir," the duty officer said, "but a call's just come in on Mr.
Conklin's emergency line."
"What? Alex is dead. Are you sure?"
"Absolutely, sir. That line has not been reassigned yet."
"All right. Continue."
"I heard the sound of a brief scuffle and someone said a name—Bourne, I think."
The DCI sat ramrod straight, his black mood dissolving as quickly as it had come on.
"Bourne. That's the name you heard, son?"
"It sure sounded like it. And the same voice said something like 'kill you.'"
"Where did the call come from?" the Old Man demanded.
"It was cut off, but I did a reverse trace. The number belongs to a shop in Alexandria.
Lincoln Fine Tailors."
"Good man!" The DCI was standing now. The hand that held the phone was trembling
slightly. "Dispatch two teams of agents immediately. Tell them Bourne has surfaced! Tell
them to terminate him on sight."
Bourne, having wrested the gun away from Leonard Fine without a shot being fired,
now shoved him so hard against the smudgy wall that a calendar was dislodged from its
nail, fell to the floor. The phone was in Bourne's hand; he had just severed the connection.
He listened for any commotion out front, any hint that the women had heard the sounds
of the brief but violent struggle.
"They're on their way," Fine said. "It's over for you."
"I don't think so." Bourne was thinking furiously. "The call went to the main
switchboard. No one would know what to do with it."
Fine shook his head, a smirk on his face. "The call bypassed the normal Agency
switchboard; it rang directly through to the DCI's duty officer. Conklin insisted I
memorize the number, to be used only in event of an emergency."
Bourne shook Fine until his teeth rattled. "You idiot! What have you done?"
"Paid my final debt to Alex Conklin."
"But I told you. I didn't kill him." And then something occurred to Bourne, one last
desperate try to win Fine over to his side, to get him to open up about what Conklin had
been up to, a clue to why he might have been killed. "I'll prove to you Alex sent me."
"More bullshit," Fine said. "It's too late—"
"I know about NX 20."
Fine stood immobile. There was a slackness to his face; his eyes were open wide in
shock. "No," he said. "No, no, no!"
"He told me," Bourne said. "Alex told me. That's why he sent me, you see."
"Alex could never have been coerced to tell about NX 20. Never!" The shock was
fading from Fine's face, to be replaced by a slow dawning of the grievous error he had
made.

Bourne nodded. "I'm a friend. Alex and I go all the way back to Vietnam. This is what
I have been trying to tell you."
"God in heaven, I was on the phone with him when ... when it happened." Fine put a
hand to his forehead. "I heard the shot!"
Bourne grabbed the tailor by his vest. "Leonard, get hold of yourself. We don't have
time for a replay."
Fine stared into Bourne's face. He had responded, as people most often do, to his given
name. "Yes." He nodded, licked his lips. He was a man coming out of a dream. "Yes, I
understand."
"The Agency will be here within minutes. I need to be gone by then."
"Yes, yes. Of course." Fine shook his head in sorrow. "Now let go of me. Please."
Freed from Bourne's grip, he knelt beneath the back window, pulled out the radiator grille,
behind which was a modern safe built into the plaster and lathe wall. He spun the dial,
unlocked it, swung the heavy door open, pulled out a small manila envelope. Closing the
safe, he replaced the grille and rose, handing the envelope to Bourne.
"This arrived for Alex late the other night. He called me yesterday morning to check
on it. He said he was coming to pick it up."
"Who sent it?"
At that moment, they heard voices raised in sharp command emanating from the shop
out front.
"They're here," Bourne said.
"Oh God!" Fine's features were pinched, bloodless.
"You must have another way out."
The tailor nodded. He gave Bourne quick instructions. "Go on now," he said urgently.
"I'll keep them occupied."
"Wipe your face," Bourne said, and when Fine took the sheen of sweat off his face, he
nodded.
While the tailor hurried into the shop to confront the agents, Bourne ran silently down
the filthy corridor. He hoped Fine would be able to hold up under their questioning;
otherwise he'd be finished. The bathroom was larger than he would have expected. To the
left was an old porcelain sink beneath which were a stack of old paint cans, the tops
rusted shut. A toilet was set against the rear wall, a shower to the left. Following Fine's
instructions, he stepped into the shower, located the panel in the tile wall, opened it. He
stepped through, replacing the tile panel.
Raising his hand, he pulled the old-fashioned light cord. He found himself in a narrow
passage that looked to be in the adjacent building. The place stank; black plastic garbage
bags had been stuffed between the rough wooden studs, possibly in lieu of insulation.
Here and there, rats had scratched their way through the plastic, had gorged themselves
on the rotting contents, left the rest spilling out onto the floor.
By the meager illumination provided by the bare bulb he saw a painted metal door that
opened out onto the alley behind the stores. As he made his way toward it, the door burst
open and two Agency suits sprinted through, guns drawn, their eyes intent on him.

CHAPTER SIX
The first two shots flew over Bourne's head as he ducked into a crouch. Coming out of
it, he kicked hard at a plastic bag of garbage, sending it flying toward the two agents. It
struck one and came apart at the seam. Refuse flew everywhere, sending the agents
backward, coughing, their eyes streaming, arms over their faces.
Bourne struck upward, shattering the light bulb, plunging the narrow space into
darkness. He turned and, flicking on his flashlight, saw the blank wall at the other end of
the passageway. But there was a doorway to the outside, how... ?
Then he saw it and immediately extinguished the narrow beam of light. He could hear
the agents shouting to each other, regaining their equilibrium. He went quickly to the far
end of the passageway and knelt, feeling for the metal ring he had seen in a dull glint
lying flush with the floor. He hooked his forefinger through it, pulled up, and the trap
door to the cellar opened. A waft of stale, damp air came to him.
Without a moment's hesitation, he levered himself through the opening. His shoes
struck the rung of a ladder and he went down, closing the trap door behind him. He
smelled the roach spray first, then, switching on his flashlight, saw the gritty cement floor
littered with their withered bodies like leaves on the ground. Rooting around in the splay
of boxes, cartons and crates, he found a crowbar. Racing up the ladder, he slid the thick
metal bar through the grips on the hatch. It was not a good fit; the crowbar remained
loose, but it was the best he could hope for. All he needed, he thought, as he crunched
across the roach-littered concrete floor, was enough time to get to the sidewalk delivery
access common in all commercial buildings.
Above his head, he could hear the hammering as the two agents tried to open the hatch.
It would not take long, he knew, for the crowbar to slip free under such vibration. But he
had found the double metal panels to the street, had climbed the short flight of concrete
steps that led upward. Behind him, the hatch burst open. He switched off his flashlight as
the agents dropped to the basement floor.
Bourne was trapped now, and he knew it. Any attempt to lift the metal panels would
bring in enough daylight for them to shoot him before he was halfway to the sidewalk.
He turned, crept down the stairs. He could hear them moving around, looking for the light
switch. They were speaking to each other in brief, staccato undertones, marking them as
seasoned professionals. He crept along the jumbled piles of supplies. He, too, was
looking for something specific.
When the lights snapped on, the two agents were spread apart, one on either side of the
basement.
"What a shithole," one of them said.
"Never mind that," the other cautioned. "Where the fuck's Bourne?"
With their bland, impassive faces there was not much to distinguish them. They wore
Agency-issue suits and Agency-issue expressions with equal assurance. But Bourne had
had much experience with the people the Agency swept into its nets. He knew how they
thought and, therefore, how they would act. Though not physically together, they moved

in concert. They would not give much thought to where he might hide. Rather they had
mathematically divided the basement into quadrants they would search as methodically
as machines. He could not now avoid them, but he could surprise them.
Once he appeared, they would move very fast. He was counting on this and so
positioned himself accordingly. He had wedged himself into a crate, his eyes smarting
from the fumes of the caustic industrial cleansers with which he shared the cramped
space. His hand scrabbled around in the darkness. Feeling something curved against the
back of his hand, he picked it up. It was a can, heavy enough for his purpose.
He could hear his heart beating, a rat scratching at the wall against which the crate
rested; all else was silent as the agents continued their painstakingly thorough search.
Bourne waited, patient, coiled. His lookout, the rat, had ceased its scratching. At least one
of the agents was near.
It was deathly quiet now. Then, all at once, the quick catch of a breath came to him, the
rustle of fabric nearly directly above his head, and he uncoiled, popping the lid off. The
agent, gun in hand, reared back. His partner, across the basement, whirled. With his left
hand, Bourne grabbed a handful of the nearest agent's shirt, jerked him forward.
Instinctively, the agent pulled back, resisting, and Bourne lunged forward, using the
agent's own momentum to slam his spine and head against the brick wall. He could hear
the rat squeak even as the agent's eyes rolled up and he slid down, unconscious.
The second agent had taken two steps toward Bourne, thought better of engaging him
hand-to-hand and aimed the Clock at his chest. Bourne threw the can into the agent's face.
As he recoiled, Bourne closed the gap between them, drove the edge of his hand into the
side of the agent's neck, felling him.
An instant later, Bourne was up the concrete stairs, opening the metal panels into fresh
air and blue sky. Dropping the panels back into place, he calmly walked down the
sidewalk until he reached Rosemont Avenue. There, he lost himself in the crowd.
A half-mile away, after assuring himself that he had not been followed, Bourne went
into a restaurant. As he was seated at a table, he scanned every face in the room,
searching for anomalies—feigned nonchalance, covert scrutiny. He ordered a BLT and a
cup of coffee, then got up and headed toward the rear of the restaurant. Determining the
men's room was empty, he locked himself in a cubicle, sat down on the toilet and opened
the envelope meant for Conklin that Fine had given him.
Inside, he found a first-class airline ticket in Conklin's name to Budapest, Hungary,
and a room key for the Danubius Grand Hotel. He sat looking at the items for a moment,
wondering why Conklin had been on his way to Budapest and whether the trip had
anything to do with his murder.
He took out Alex's cell phone, dialed a local number. Now that he had a direction, he
felt better. Deron picked up after the third ring.
"Peace, Love and Understanding."
Bourne laughed. "It's Jason." He never knew how Deron was going to answer the
phone. Deron was quite literally an artist at his trade. It just happened that his trade was
forgery. He made his living painting copies of Old Master oils that hung on mansion

walls. They were so exacting, so expert that every so often one was sold at auction or
ended up in a museum collection. On the side, just for the fun of it, he forged other things.
"I've been following the news on you and it has a distinctly ominous tone," Deron said,
in his slight British accent.
"Tell me something I don't know." At the sound of the men's room door opening,
Bourne paused. He stood up, put his shoes on either side of the toilet, peered over the top
of the stall. A man with gray hair, a beard and a slight limp had bellied up to the urinal.
He wore a dark suede bomber jacket, black slacks, nothing special. And yet, all at once
Bourne felt trapped. He had to curb his desire to get out immediately.
"Damn, is the man on your ass?" It was always interesting to hear argot coming out of
that cultured mouth.
"He was, up until I lost him.." Bourne left the bathroom and went back into the
restaurant, scanning every table as he went. By this time his sandwich had come, but his
coffee was cold. He flagged down the waitress, asked for it to be replaced. When she had
walked away, he said softly into the phone, "Listen, Deron, I need the usual—passport
and contact lenses in my prescription, and I need them yesterday."
"Nationality?"
"Let's keep it American."
"I get the idea. The man won't expect that."
"Something like that. I want the name on the passport to be Alexander Conklin."
Deron gave a low whistle. "It's your call, Jason. Give me two hours."
"Do I have a choice?"
Deron's odd little giggle exploded down the line. "You can go away hungry. I have all
your photos. Which one d'you want?"
When Bourne told him, he said, "Are you sure? You've got your hair shaved down to
the nub. Doesn't look like you at all now."
"It will when I get through with my makeover," Bourne replied. "I've been put on the
Agency hit list."
"Number one with a bullet, I shouldn't think. Where should we meet?"
Bourne told him.
"Good enough. Yo, listen, Jason." Deron's tone was abruptly more somber. "That must
have been tough. I mean, you saw them, didn't you?"
Bourne stared at his plate. Why had he ordered this sandwich? The tomato had a raw
and bloody look. "I saw them, yes." What if he could somehow roll back time, make Alex
and Mo reappear? That would be quite a trick. But the past stayed the past, receding
further from memory with every day.
"It's not like Butch Cassidy"
Bourne did not say a word.
Deron sighed. "I knew Alex and Mo, too."
"Of course you did. I introduced you," Bourne said, as he closed the phone.
He sat at the table for a while, thinking. Something was bothering him. An alarm bell
had gone off in his head as he had exited the men's room, but he had been distracted by

his conversation with Deron and so he had not taken full note of it. What was it? Slowly,
carefully, he scanned the room again. Then he had it. He did not see the man with the
beard and slight limp. Perhaps he had finished his meal and had been on his way out. On
the other hand, his presence in the men's room had made Bourne distinctly uneasy. There
was something about him----He threw some money onto the table and went to the front of
the restaurant. The two windows that looked out onto the street were separated by a wide
mahogany pillar. Bourne stood behind it, using it as a screen while he checked the street.
Pedestrians were first—anyone walking at an unnaturally slow pace, anyone loitering,
reading a newspaper, standing too long in front of the shop window directly across the
street, possibly scanning it for the reflection of the restaurant's entrance. He saw nothing
suspicious. He marked three people sitting inside parked cars—one woman, two men. He
could not see their faces. And then, of course, there were the cars parked on the restaurant
side of the street.
Without a second thought, he went out onto the street. It was late morning and the
crowd was denser now. That suited his current needs. He spent the next twenty minutes
surveilling his immediate environment, checking doorways, storefronts, passing
pedestrians and vehicles, windows and rooftops. When he'd satisfied himself that the
field contained no Agency suits, he crossed the street, went into a liquor store. He asked
for a bottle of the Speyside sherry-cask single-malt that had been Conklin's drink. While
the proprietor went to fetch it, he looked out the window. No one in any of the cars
parked on the restaurant side of the street. As he watched, one of the men he had noted
got out of his car, went into a pharmacy. He had neither a beard nor a limp.
He had nearly two hours before he had to meet Deron, and he wanted to use the time
productively. The memory of the Paris office, the voice, the half-remembered face that
had been pushed aside by the exigencies of current circumstance, had now returned.
According to Mo Panov's methodology, he needed to inhale the Scotch again in order to
pull out more of the memory. In this way, he hoped to try to find out who the man in
Paris was and why the particular memory of him had surfaced now. Had it been simply
the scent of the single-malt, or was it something in his current predicament that had
provoked it?
Bourne paid for the Scotch with a credit card, feeling he was safe enough using it in a
liquor store. A moment later, he exited the store with his package. He passed the car with
the woman inside. A small child was sitting next to her in the passenger's seat. Since the
Agency would never allow a child to be used on an active field surveillance, that left the
second man as a possibility. Bourne turned, walking away from the car in which the man
sat. He did not look behind him, did not try to use any covert methods of spying or the
standard procedures for shaking a tail. He did keep track of all the cars immediately in
front and behind him, however.
Within ten minutes, he had reached a park. He sat down on a wrought-iron bench,
watched the pigeons rise and fall, wheeling against the blue sky overhead. The other
benches were perhaps half-full. An old man came into the park; he held a brown bag as
crumpled as his face from which he extracted handfuls of bread crumbs. The pigeons, it
seemed, had been expecting him, for they swooped down, swirling around him, cooing
and clucking in delight as they gorged themselves.

Bourne opened the bottle of single-malt, sniffed its elegant and complex aroma.
Immediately, Alex's face flashed before him, and the slow creep of blood over the floor.
Gently, almost reverently, he set this image aside. He took a small sip of the Scotch,
holding it on his palate, allowing the fumes to rise up into his nose, to bring him back to
the shard of memory he was finding so elusive. In his mind's eye, he saw again the view
out onto the Champs-Elysées. He was holding the cut-crystal glass in his hand, and as he
took another sip of the Scotch, he willed himself to bring the glass to his lips. He heard
the strong, operatic voice, willed himself to turn back into the Paris office where he had
been standing an unknown time ago.
Now, for the first time, he could see the plush appointments of the room, the painting
by Raoul Dufy of an elegant horse and rider in the Bois de Boulogne, the dark green
walls with their deep luster, the high cream ceiling etched in the clear, piercing light of
Paris. Go on, he urged himself. Go on-----A patterned carpet, two high-backed
upholstered chairs, a heavy polished walnut desk in the Regency style of Louis XIV,
behind which stood, smiling, a tall, handsome man with worldly eyes, a long Gallic nose
and prematurely white hair. Jacques Robbinet, French Minister of Culture.
That was it! How Bourne knew him, why they had become friends and, in a sense,
compatriots, was still a mystery, but at least now he knew that he had an ally he could
contact and count on. Elated, Bourne put the Scotch bottle underneath the bench, a gift
for the first vagrant who noticed it. He looked around without seeming to. The old man
had gone and so had most of the pigeons; just a few of the largest ones, chests puffed out
to protect their territory, were strutting around, scrounging the last of the crumbs. A
young couple were kissing on a nearby bench; three kids with a boombox passed through,
made lewd noises at the snuggled couple. His senses were on high alert—something was
wrong, out of place, but he could not figure out what it was.
He was keenly aware that the deadline to meet Deron was fast approaching, but
instinct warned him not to move until he had identified the anomaly. He looked again at
all the people in the park. No bearded man, certainly none with a limp. And yet...
Diagonally across from him was a man sitting forward, elbows on knees, hands together.
He was watching a young boy whose father had just handed him an ice cream cone. What
interested Bourne was that he was dressed in a dark suede bomber jacket and black slacks.
His hair was black, not gray, he had no beard, and by the normal way his legs were bent,
Bourne was certain that he didn't have a limp.
Bourne, himself a chameleon, an expert in disguise, knew that one of the best methods
of keeping hidden was to change your gait, especially if one was trying to hide from a
professional. An amateur might notice superficial aspects such as hair color and clothes,
but to a trained agent the way you moved and walked was as individual as a fingerprint.
He tried to bring up the image of the man in the restaurant men's room. Had he been
wearing a wig and fake beard? Bourne couldn't be sure. What he was certain of, though,
was that the man had been wearing a dark suede bomber jacket and black slacks. From
this position he couldn't see the man's face, but it was clear that he was far younger than
the man in the men's room had appeared.
There was something else about him, but what was it? He studied the side of the man's
face for several moments before he had it. A flash image of the man who'd jumped him in

the woods of Conklin's estate came to him. It was the shape of the ear, the deep brownish
color, the configuration of the whorls.
Good God, the thought, abruptly disoriented, this was the man who'd shot at him,
who'd almost succeeded in killing him in the Manassas cave! How had he trailed Bourne
all the way from there when Bourne had given the slip to every Agency and state trooper
in the area? He felt a momentary chill run through him. What kind of man could do that?
He knew there was only one way to find out. Experience told him that when you are up
against a formidable foe the only way to get a true measure of him is to do the last thing
he would expect. Still, for a moment, he hesitated. He'd never been up against an
antagonist like this. He understood that he had crossed over into unknown territory.
Knowing this, he rose and slowly and deliberately crossed the park and sat down
beside the man, whose face he now saw had a distinctly Asian cast to it. To his credit, the
man did not start or give any overt indication of surprise. He continued to watch the little
boy. As the ice cream started to melt, his father showed him how to turn the cone to lick
up the drippings.
"Who are you?" Bourne said. "Why do you want to kill me?"
The man beside him looked straight ahead, gave no sign at all that he had heard what
Bourne had said. "Such a beatific scene of domestic bliss." There was an acid edge to his
voice. "I wonder if the child knows that at a moment's notice his father could abandon
him."
Bourne had an odd reaction to hearing the other's voice in this setting. It was as if he
had moved out of the shadows to fully inhabit the world of those around them.
"No matter how much you want to kill me," Bourne said, "you can't touch me here in
this public place."
"The boy is, what, six, I would say. Far too young to understand the nature of life, far
too young to fathom why his father would leave."
Bourne shook his head. The conversation was not proceeding as he had intended.
"What makes you think that? Why would the father abandon his son?"
"An interesting question from a man with two children. Jamie and Alison, isn't it?"
Bourne started as if the other had plunged a knife into his side. Fear and anger swirled
inside him but it was the anger that he allowed to rise to the surface. "I won't even ask
how you know so much about me, but I will tell you this, in threatening my family you've
made a fatal mistake."
"Oh, there's no need to think that. I have no designs on your children," Khan said
evenly. "I was merely wondering how Jamie will feel when you never come back."
"I'll never abandon my son. I'll do whatever it takes to come safely back to him."
"It seems odd to me that you're so passionate about your current family when you
failed Dao, Joshua and Alyssa."
Now the fear was gaining ground inside Bourne. His heart was pounding painfully, and
there was a sharp pain in his chest. "What are you talking about? Where did you get the
idea that I failed them?"
"You abandoned them to their fate, didn't you?"

Bourne felt as if he was losing his grip on reality. "How dare you! They died! They
were pulled away from me, and I've never forgotten them!"
The hint of a smile curled the edges of the other's lips, as if he had scored a victory in
dragging Bourne across the invisible barrier. "Not even when you married Marie? Not
even when Jamie and Alison where born?" His tone was tightly wound now, as if he was
struggling to keep something deep inside him held in check. "You tried to replicate
Joshua and Alyssa. You even used the same first letters in their names."
Bourne felt as if he'd been beaten senseless. There was an inchoate roaring in his ears.
"Who are you?" he repeated in a strangled voice.
"I'm known as Khan. But who are you, David Webb? A professor of linguistics might
possibly be at home in the wilderness, but he surely doesn't know hand-to-hand combat;
he doesn't know how to fashion a Viet Cong cage-net; he doesn't know how to hijack a
car. Above all, he doesn't know how to successfully conceal himself from the CIA."
"It seems, then, that we're a mystery to one another."
That same maddening enigmatic smile played around Khan's mouth. Bourne felt a
prickling of the short hairs at the nape of his neck, the sense that something in his
shattered memory was trying to surface.
"Keep telling yourself that. The fact is, I could kill you now, even in this public place,"
Khan said with a great deal of venom. The smile had vanished as quickly as a cloud
changes its shape, and there was a small tremor in the smooth bronze column of his neck,
as if some fury, long held in check, had briefly escaped to the surface. "I should kill you
now. But such extreme action would expose me to the pair of CIA agents who have
entered the park from the north entrance."
Without moving his head, Bourne directed his gaze in the indicated direction. Khan
was quite right. Two Agency suits were scanning the faces of those in the immediate
vicinity.
"I believe that it's time we left." Khan rose, looked down at Bourne for a moment.
"This is a simple situation. Either come with me or be taken."
Bourne got up and, walking side by side with Khan, went out of the park. Khan was
between Bourne and the agents, and he took a route that would keep him in that position.
Again, Bourne was impressed with the young man's expertise as well as his thinking in
extreme situations.
"Why are you doing this?" Bourne asked. He had not been immune to the other's
significant flare of temper, an incandescence as enigmatic to Bourne as it was alarming.
Khan didn't answer.
They entered the stream of pedestrians and were soon lost within the flow. Khan had
witnessed the four agents heading into Lincoln Fine Tailors, and he had quickly
memorized their faces. It hadn't been difficult; in the jungle where he had raised himself,
the instant identification of an individual often meant the difference between life and
death. In any event, unlike Webb, he knew where all four were and he was on the lookout
for the other two now, because at this crucial juncture when he was leading his target to a
place of his choosing, he did not want any intrusion.

Sure enough, up ahead in the crowd, he spotted them. They were in standard formation,
one on either side of the street, heading directly toward them. He turned to Webb to alert
him, only to find that he was alone in the throng. Webb had vanished into thin air.

CHAPTER SEVEN
Deep within the bowels of Humanistas, Ltd. was a sophisticated listening station that
monitored the clandestine signals traffic from all the various major intelligence networks.
No human ear heard the raw data because no human ear would be able to make sense of it.
Since the signals were encrypted, the intercepted traffic was run through a series of
sophisticated software programs made up of heuristic algorithms—that is to say, they had
the ability to learn. There was a program for each intelligence network because each
agency had selected a different encryption algorithm.
Humanistas' battery of programmers were more successful at breaking some codes
than others, but the bottom line was that Spalko more or less knew what was going on all
over the world. The American CIA code was one of the ones that had been broken, so
within hours of the DCI ordering the termination of Jason Bourne, Stepan Spalko was
reading about it.
"Excellent," he said. "Now everything is going according to plan." He set down the
decryption, then pulled up a map of Nairobi on a monitor screen. He kept moving around
the city until he found the area on the outskirts where President Jomo wanted the
Humanistas medical team sent in to minister to the quarantined known AIDS patients.
At that moment his cell phone rang. He listened to the voice on the other end of the
line. He checked his watch, said, finally, "There should be enough time. You've done
well." Then he took the elevator upstairs to Ethan Hearn's office. On the way up, he made
a single call, achieving in minutes what many others in Budapest had tried in vain for
weeks to get— an orchestra seat for that night's opera.
Humanistas, Ltd.'s newest young development officer was hard at work on his
computer, but he stood up as soon as Spalko walked in. He looked as clean and neat as
Spalko imagined he had when he had walked in to work this morning.
"No need to be formal around here, Ethan," Spalko said with an easy smile. "This isn't
the army, you know."
"Yes, sir. Thank you." Hearn stretched his back. "I've been at it since seven this
morning."
"How goes the fund-raising?"
"I have two dinners and a lunch with solid prospects set up for early next week. I've emailed you a copy of the pitch letters I want to give to them."
"Good, good." Spalko glanced around the room as if to make certain no one else was in
hearing distance. "Tell me, do you own a tux?"
"Absolutely, sir. I couldn't do my job otherwise."
"Excellent. Go home and change into it."

"Sir?" The young man's brows had knitted together in surprise.
"You're going to the opera."
"Tonight? At such short notice? How did you manage to get tickets?"
Spalko laughed. "You know, I like you, Ethan. I'm willing to bet you're the last honest
man on earth."
"Sir, I have no doubt that would be you."
Spalko laughed again at the bewildered expression that had come over the young man.
"That was a joke, Ethan. Now, come on. There's no time to lose."
"But my work." Hearn gestured at the computer screen.
"In a way, tonight will be work. There'll be a man at the opera I want to recruit as a
benefactor." Spalko's demeanor was so relaxed, so nonchalant that Hearn never suspected
a thing. "This man—his name is László Molnar—"
"I've never heard of him."
"You wouldn't." Spalko's voice lowered, became conspiratorial. "Though he is quite
wealthy, he is paranoid about anyone knowing. He's not on any donor list, that I can
assure you, and if you make any allusion to his wealth, you might as well forget ever
talking to him again."
"I understand completely, sir," Hearn said.
"He is a connoisseur of sorts, though nowadays it seems to me the word has lost much
of its meaning."
"Yes, sir." Hearn nodded. "I think I know what you mean."
Spalko was quite certain the young man had no idea what he meant, and a vague
undertone of regret crept into his thoughts. He had once been as naive as Hearn, a
hundred years ago, or so it now seemed. "In any event, Molnar loves opera. He has had a
subscription for years."
"I know exactly how to proceed with difficult prospects like Laszl6 Molnar." Hearn
deftly pulled on his suit jacket. "You can count on me."
Spalko grinned. "Somehow I knew I could. Now, once you've hooked him, I want you
to take him to Underground. Do you know the bar, Ethan?"
"Of course, sir. But it will be quite late. After midnight, surely."
Spalko put his forefinger beside his nose. "Another secret. Molnar is something of a
night owl. He'll resist, however. It seems he enjoys being persuaded. You must persevere,
Ethan, do you understand?"
"Perfectly."
Spalko handed him a slip of paper with Molnar's seat number. "Then go on. Have a
good time." He gave him a small shove. "And good luck."
The imposing Romanesque facade of Magyar Allami Operahaz, the Hungarian State
Opera House, was ablaze with light. Inside, the magnificent, ornate gilt-and-red interior,
three stories high, glittered with what seemed like ten thousand spearpoints of light from
the elaborate cut-crystal chandelier that descended from the muraled domed ceiling like a
giant bell.

Tonight, the company was presenting Zoltan Kodaly's Hdryjdnos, a traditional favorite
that had been in its repertory since 1926. Ethan Hearn hurried into the vast marble lobby,
echoing with the voices of Budapest society assembled for the evening's festivities. His
tuxedo was of a fine worsted fabric and was well cut, but it was hardly a name brand. In
his line of work, what he wore and how he wore it was extremely important. He tended
toward elegant, muted clothes, never anything flashy or too expensive. Humility was the
name of the game when one was asking for donations.
He did not want to be late, but he slowed himself down, reluctant to miss a moment of
that peculiar electric time just before the curtain rose that made his heart thump.
Having assiduously boned up on the hobbies of Hungarian society, he fancied himself
something of an opera buff. He liked Hdry Jdnos both because of its music, which was
derived from Hungarian folk music, and because of the tall tale the veteran soldier Janos
spins of his rescue of the emperor's daughter, his promotion to general, his virtual singlehanded defeat of Napoleon and his eventual winning of the heart of the emperor's
daughter. It was a sweet fable, drenched in the bloody history of Hungary.
In the end, it was fortuitous that he had arrived late, because by consulting the slip of
paper Spalko had given him, he was able to identify László Molnar, who, along with
most others, was already seated. From what Hearn could determine at first sight, he was a
middle-aged man of medium height, heavy around the gut, and, with a slicked-back mass
of black hair, a head not unlike a mushroom. A forest of bristles sprouted from his ears
and the backs of his blunt-fingered hands. He was ignoring the woman on his left, who,
in any case, was speaking, rather too loudly, to her companion. The seat to Molnar's right
was vacant. It appeared that he had come to the opera on his own. All the better, Hearn
thought, as he took his seat near the rear of the orchestra. A moment later the lights
dimmed, the orchestra struck up the prelude and the curtain slid smoothly up.
Later, during the intermission, Hearn took a cup of hot chocolate and mingled with the
soigne crowd. This was how humans had evolved. As opposed to the animal world, the
female was definitely the more colorful of the species. The women were sheathed in long
dresses of shantung silk, Venetian moire, Moroccan satin that just months ago had been
displayed on the couturier runways of Paris, Milan and New York. The men, clad in
designer tuxedos, appeared content to circle their mates, who gaggled in clusters, fetching
them champagne or hot chocolate when needed but, for the most part, looking thoroughly
bored.
Hearn had enjoyed the first half of the opera and was looking forward to the
conclusion. He had not, however, forgotten his assignment. In fact, during the
performance he had spent some time coming up with an approach. He never liked to lock
himself into a plan; rather he used his first visual assessment of the prospect to figure out
an approach. To the discerning eye, so much could be determined by visual cues. Did the
prospect care about his appearance? Did he like food, or was he indifferent to it? Did he
drink or smoke? Was he cultured or uncouth? All these factors and many more went into
the mix.
So it was that by the time Hearn made his approach, he was confident he could strike
up a conversation with László Molnar.
"Pardon me," Hearn said in his most deprecating tone of voice. "I'm a lover of opera. I
was wondering if you were, too."

Molnar had turned. He wore an Armani tuxedo that emphasized his broad shoulders
while cleverly hiding the bulk of his gut. His ears were very large and, this close up, even
hairier than they had seemed at first glance. "I am a student of the opera," he said slowly
and, to Hearn's attuned senses, warily. Hearn smiled his most charming smile and
engaged Molnar's dark eyes with his own. "To be frank," Molnar continued, apparently
mollified, "I'm consumed by it."
This fit in perfectly with what Spalko had told him, Hearn thought. "I have a
subscription," he said in his effortless fashion. "I've had one for some years, and I
couldn't help noticing that you have one also." He laughed softly. "I don't get to meet too
many people with a love of opera. My wife prefers jazz." "Mine loved the opera."
"You're divorced?" "A widower." "Oh, I'm so sorry."
"It happened some time ago," Molnar said, warming a little now that he'd given up this
intimate bit of knowledge. "I miss her so terribly that I've never sold her seat."
Hearn held out a hand. "Ethan Hearn."
After the slightest hesitation, László Molnar gripped it with his hairy-backed paw.
"László Molnar. I'm pleased to make your acquaintance."
Hearn gave a courtly little bow. "Would you care to join me in a hot chocolate, Mr.
Molnar?"
This offer appeared to please the other, and he nodded. "I'd be delighted." As they
walked together through the milling crowd, they exchanged lists of their favorite operas
and opera composers. Since Hearn had asked Molnar to go first, he made certain they had
many in common. Molnar was again pleased. As Spalko had noted, there was something
open and honest about Hearn that even the most jaundiced eye could not help but
appreciate. He possessed the knack of being natural even in the most artificial situations.
It was this sincerity of spirit that caught Molnar, dissolving his defenses.
"Are you enjoying the performance?" he inquired as they sipped their hot chocolate.
"Very much," Hearn said. "But Haryjdnos is so full of emotion I confess I'd enjoy it all
the more if I could see the expressions on the principals' faces. Sad to say, when I bought
the subscription I couldn't afford anything closer, and now it's quite impossible to obtain
a better seat."
For a moment, Molnar said nothing, and Hearn feared that he was going to let the
opening pass. Then he said, as if he had just thought of it, "Would you care to sit in my
wife's seat?"
"Once more," Hasan Arsenov said. "We need to go over again the sequence of events
that will gain us our freedom."
"But I know them as well as I know your face," Zina protested.
"Well enough to negotiate the route to our final destination blindfolded?"
"Don't be ridiculous," Zina scoffed.
"In Icelandic, Zina. We speak now only in Icelandic."
In their hotel room, the schematics for the Oskjuhlid Hotel in Reykjavik were spread
out across the large desk. In the inviting glow of lamplight, every layer of the hotel was
laid bare, from the foundation, to the security, sewage and heating and air-conditioning

systems, to the floor plans themselves. On each oversized bluesheet were neatly written a
series of notes, directional arrows, markouts indicating the layers of security that had
been added by each of the participating nations for the terrorism summit. Spalko's intel
was impeccably detailed.
"From the time we breach the hotel's defenses," Arsenov said, "we'll have very little
time to accomplish our goal. The worst part is we won't know how little time until we get
there and make a dry run. That makes it even more imperative that there be no hesitation,
no mistake—not one wrong turn!" In his ardor, his dark eyes were blazing. Taking up a
sash of hers, he led her to one end of the room. He wrapped it around her head, tying it
tightly enough so that he knew she couldn't see.
"We've just entered the hotel." He let go of her. "Now I want you to walk out the route
for me. I'll be timing you. Now go!"
For two-thirds of the circuitous journey, she did well, but then, at the junction of what
would be two branching corridors, she went left instead of right.
"You're finished," he said harshly as he whipped off the blindfold. "Even if you
corrected your mistake, you wouldn't make the target on time. Security—be it American,
Russian or Arab—would catch up to you and shoot you dead."
Zina was trembling, furious with herself and with him.
"I know that face, Zina. Put your anger away," Hasan said. "Emotion breaks
concentration, and concentration is what you need now. When you can make the path
blindfolded without making a mistake, we will be finished for this evening."
An hour later, her mission accomplished, Zina said, "Come to bed, my love."
Arsenov, dressed now only in a simple muslin robe, dyed black, belted at the waist,
shook his head. He was standing by the huge window, looking out at the diamond nightsparkle of Budapest reflected in the dark water of the Danube.
Zina sprawled naked on the down comforter, laughed softly, deep in her throat. "Hasan,
feel." She moved her palm, her long, splayed fingers over the sheets. "Pure Egyptian
cotton, so luxurious."
He wheeled on her, a frown of disapproval darkening his face. "That's just it, Zina." He
pointed to the half-empty bottle on the night table. "Napoleon brandy, soft sheets, a down
comforter. These luxuries are not for us."
Zina's eyes opened wide, her heavy lips forming a moue. "And why not?"
"Has the lesson I've just taught you gone in one ear only to fly out the other? Because
we are warriors, because we have renounced all worldly possessions."
"Have you renounced your weapons, Hasan?"
He shook his head, his eyes hard and cold. "Our weapons have a purpose."
"These soft things also have a purpose, Hasan. They make me happy."
He made a guttural sound in the back of his throat, curt and dismissive.
"I don't want to possess these things, Hasan," Zina said huskily, "just use them for a
night or two." She held out a hand to him. "Can't you relax your iron-bound rules for
even that short a time? We've both worked hard today; we deserve a little relaxation."

"Speak for yourself. I won't be seduced by luxuries," he said shortly. "It disgusts me
that you have been."
"I don't believe I disgust you." She had seen something in his eyes, a sort of self-denial
that she naturally enough misinterpreted as the rock of his strict ascetic nature.
"All right, then," she said. "I'll break the brandy bottle, sow the bed with glass, if only
you'll come join me."
"I've told you," he warned darkly. "Do not joke of these matters, Zina."
She sat up, on her knees moved toward him, her breasts, sheened in golden lamplight,
swaying provocatively. "I'm perfectly serious. If it's your wish to lie in a bed of pain
while we make love, who am I to argue?"
He stood looking at her for a long time. It did not occur to him that she might be
mocking him still. "Don't you understand." He took a step toward her. "Our path is set.
We are bound to the Tariqat, the spiritual path to Allah."
"Don't distract me, Hasan. I'm still thinking of weapons." She grabbed a handful of
muslin and pulled him toward her. Her other hand reached out, gently caressed the fabric
of the bandage that wrapped the area of his thigh where he'd been shot. Then it moved
higher.
Their lovemaking was as fierce as any hand-to-hand combat. It arose as much out of
wanting to hurt the other as it did from physical need. In their jackhammer thrashing,
moaning and release, it was doubtful that love played any role. For his part, Arsenov
longed to be ground into the bed of glass shards that Zina had joked about, so that when
her nails gripped him, he resisted her, obliging her to hold on tighter, to score his skin. He
was rough enough to bait her, so that she bared her teeth, used them on the powerful
muscles of his shoulders, his chest, his arms. It was only with the rising tide of pain
threatening to overpower the pleasure that the strange hallucinatory sensation in which he
was lost receded somewhat.
Punishment was required for what he had done to Khalid Murat, his compatriot, his
friend. Never mind that he had done what was needed in order for his people to survive
and flourish. How many times had he told himself that Khalid Murat had been sacrificed
on the altar of Chechnya's future? And yet, like a sinner, an outcast, he was hounded by
doubt and fear, in need of cruel punishment. Though truly, he thought now in the little
death that comes in sexual release, was it not always thus with prophets?
Was not this torture further proof that the road he had embarked upon was the
righteous one?
Beside him, Zina lay in his arms. She might have been miles away, though in a manner
of speaking her mind was also filled with thoughts of prophets. Or, more accurately, one
prophet. This latter-day prophet had dominated her mind ever since she had drawn Hasan
to the bed. She hated that Hasan could not let himself take pleasure in the luxuries around
him, and so, when he grasped her, it was not him she was thinking of, when he entered
her, in her mind it was not him at all, but Stepan Spalko to whom she crooned. And when,
nearing her end, she bit her lip it was not out of passion, as Hasan believed, but out of a
fear that she would shout Spalko's name. She so much wanted to, if only to hurt Hasan in
a manner that would cut him to the quick, for she had no doubt of his love for her. This

love she found dumb and unknowing, an infantile thing like a baby reaching for its
mother's breast. What he craved from her was warmth and shelter, the quick thrust back
into the womb. It was a love that made her skin crawl.
But what she craved ...
Her thoughts froze in their tracks as he moved against her, sighing. She had supposed
that he was asleep, but he was not, or else something had roused him. Now, attendant on
his desires, she had no time for her own thoughts. She smelled his manly scent, rising like
a pre-dawn mist, and his breathing quickened just a little.
"I was thinking," he whispered, "about what it means to be a prophet, whether one day
I will be called that among our people."
Zina said nothing, knowing that he wished her to be silent now, to listen only, as he
reassured himself of his chosen path. This was Arsenov's weakness, the one unknown to
anyone else, the one he showed only to her. She wondered if Khalid Murat had been
clever enough to have suspected this weakness. She was almost certain Stepan Spalko
was.
"The Qur'an tells us that each of our prophets is the incarnation of a divine attribute,"
Arsenov said. "Moses is the manifestation of the transcendent aspect of reality, because
of his ability to speak with God without an intermediary. In the Qur'an, the Lord said to
Moses, 'Fear not, you are transcendent.' Jesus is the manifestation of prophethood. As an
infant, he cried, 'God gave me the book and placed me as a prophet.'
"But Mohammad is the spiritual incarnation and manifestation of all of God's names.
Mohammad himself said, 'What God first created was my light. I was a prophet while
Adam was still between water and earth.'"
Zina waited the space of several heartbeats to be certain that he had finished
pontificating. Then, with a hand placed on his slowly rising and falling chest, she asked
as she knew he wanted her to ask, "And what is your divine attribute, my prophet?"
Arsenov turned his head on the pillow so that he could see her fully. The lamplight
behind her cast most of her face in shadow, just a fiery line along her cheek and jawbone
was limned in a long painterly stroke, and he was caught out in a thought he most often
kept hidden, even from himself. He did not know what he would do without her strength
and vitality. For him, her womb represented immortality, the sacred place from which his
sons would issue, his line continuing through all eternity. But he knew this dream could
not happen without Spalko's help. "Ah, Zina, if you only knew what the Shaykh will do
for us, what he will help us become."
She rested her cheek against her folded arm. "Tell me."
But he shook his head, a small smile playing at the corners of his mouth. "That would
be a mistake."
"Why?"
"Because you must see for yourself without any foreknowledge the devastation caused
by the weapon."
Now, peering into Arsenov's eyes, she experienced a chill deep in the core of her,
where she rarely dared to look. Possibly she felt an intimation of the terrible power that
would be unleashed in Nairobi in three days' time. But with the clairvoyance sometimes
granted lovers, she understood that what interested Hasan most was the fear this form of

death—whatever it would turn out to be—would engender. It was fear he meant to wield,
that was clear enough. Fear to use as a righteous sword to regain all that had been lost to
the Chechens over centuries of abuse, displacement and bloodshed.
From an early age, Zina had been on intimate terms with fear. Her father, weak and
dying of the disease of despair that ran like a plague through Chechnya, who had once
provided for his family as all Chechen men must but could not now even show his face
on the street for fear of being picked up by the Russians. Her mother, once a beautiful
young woman, in her last years a sunken-chested crone with thinning hair, bad eyesight
and faulty memory.
After she came home from the long day's scavenging, she was obliged to walk three
kilometers to the nearest public water pump, stand in the queue for an hour or two, only
to walk back, lug the full bucket up the five flights to their filthy room.
That water! Sometimes, even now, Zina would awake, gagging, with its foul turpentine
taste in her mouth.
One night her mother sat down and did not get up. She was twenty-eight but looked
more than twice that age. From the constantly burning oil fires, her lungs were full of tar.
When Zina's younger brother had complained of thirst, the old woman had looked at Zina
and said, "I can't get up. Even for our water. I can't go on.. .."
Zina rolled and, twisting her torso, turned off the lamp. The moon, previously unseen,
filled the casement of the window. At the point where her upper torso dipped down to her
narrow waist, a small pool of its cool light fell upon the bed, illuminating the tip of her
breast, below which, under the deep curve, lay Hasan's hand. Outside that pool there was
only darkness.
For a long time she lay with her eyes open, listening to Hasan's regular breathing,
waiting for sleep to claim her. Who knew the meaning of fear better than Chechens? she
wondered. In Hasan's face was written the lamentable history of their people. Never mind
death, never mind ruin, there was only one outcome that he could see: vindication for
Chechnya. And with a heart made heavy by despair, Zina knew that the attention of the
world needed to be snapped into focus. These days, there was only one way to do that.
She knew Hasan was right: Death had to come in a manner heretofore unthinkable, but
what price they might all pay she could not begin to imagine.

CHAPTER EIGHT
Jacques Robbinet liked to spend mornings with his wife, drinking cafe au lait, reading
the papers and talking with her about the economy, their children and the state of their
friends' lives. They never spoke about his work.
He made it a strict rule never to come into the office before noon. Once there, he spent
an hour or so scanning documents, interdepartmental memos and the like, writing e-mail
responses when necessary. His phone was answered by his assistant, who logged calls
and brought him messages deemed urgent by her. In this, as in all things she did for
Robbinet, she was exemplary. She had been trained by him and her instincts were
unerring.

Best of all, she was utterly discreet. This meant that Robbinet could tell her where he
was lunching each day with his mistress—be it a quiet bistro or the mistress's apartment
in the fourth arrondissement. This was crucial, since Robbinet took long lunches, even by
French standards. He rarely returned to the office before four, but he was often at his desk
until well past midnight, in signals with his counterparts in America. Robbinet's official
title might be Minister of Culture, but in fact he was a spy at such a high level that he
reported directly to the French president.
On this particular evening, however, he was out to dinner, the afternoon having proved
so tiresomely hectic he'd had to postpone his daily tryst until late in the evening. There
was a flap that concerned him greatly. A worldwide sanction had been routed to him by
his American friends, and as he read it, his blood had run cold, for the target for
termination was Jason Bourne.
Some years ago Robbinet had met Bourne at, of all places, a spa. Robbinet had booked
a weekend at the spa just outside Paris so that he could be with his then-mistress, a tiny
thing with enormous appetites. She had been a ballet dancer; Robbinet still recalled with
great fondness the marvelous suppleness of her body. In any event, they had met in the
steam room and they had gotten to talking. Eventually, in a most unsettling manner, he
was to discover that Bourne had been there looking for a certain double agent. Having
ferreted her out, he had killed her while Robbinet was getting a treatment—green mud, if
memory served. Good thing, too, since the double agent was posing as Robbinet's
therapist in order to assassinate him. Is there any place where one is more vulnerable than
on a therapist's table? Robbinet wondered. What could he do after that, except take
Bourne out to a lavish dinner. That night, over foie gras, veal kidneys in mustard-spiked
jus and tarte Tatin, all washed down with three magnificent bottles of the finest ruby
Bordeaux, having uncovered each other's secrets, they became fast friends.
It was through Bourne that Robbinet had met Alexander Conklin and had become
Conklin's conduit to the operations of the Quai d'Orsay and Interpol.
In the end, Robbinet's trust in his assistant was Jason Bourne's good fortune, for it was
over cafe and thoroughly decadent millefeuille at Chez Georges with Delphine that he
received the call from her. He loved the restaurant for both its food and its location.
Because it was across the street from the Bourse—the French equivalent of the New York
Stock Exchange— it was frequented by brokers and businessmen, people far more
discreet than the gossiping politicians with whom Robbinet was, from time to time,
obliged to rub elbows.
"There's someone on the line," his assistant said in his ear. Thankfully, she monitored
his after-hours calls from home. "He says it's urgent he speak with you."
Robbinet smiled at Delphine. His mistress was an elegant, mature beauty whose looks
were diametrically opposed to those of his wife of thirty years. They had been having a
most delightful conversation about Aristide Maillot, whose voluptuous nudes graced the
Tuilleries, and Jules Massenet, whose opera Manon they both thought overrated. Really,
he could not understand the American male obsession with girls scarcely out of their
teens. The thought of taking as a mistress someone his daughter's age seemed frightful to
him, not to mention pointless. What on earth would there be to talk about over cafe and
millefeuille^ "Has he given you his name?" he said into the phone. "Yes. Jason Bourne."
Robbinet's pulse started to pound. "Put him through," he said immediately. Then, because

it was inexcusable to speak on the phone for any length of time in front of one's mistress,
he excused himself, went outside into the fine mist of the Parisian evening and waited for
the sound of his old friend's voice.
"My dear Jason. How long has it been?"
Bourne's spirits rose the moment he heard Jacques Robbinet's voice booming through
his cell phone. At last the voice of someone inside who wasn't—he hoped!—trying to kill
him. He was barreling down the Capital Beltway in another car he had stolen on his way
to meet Deron.
"To tell you the truth, I don't know."
"It's been years, can you believe it?" Robbinet said. "But, really, I must tell you that
I've kept track of you through Alex."
Bourne, who'd felt some initial trepidation, now began to relax. "Jacques, you've heard
about Alex."
"Yes, mon ami. The American DCI has sent out a worldwide sanction on you. But I
don't believe a word of it. You couldn't possibly have murdered Alex. Do you know who
did?"
"I'm trying to find out. All I know for certain at the moment is that someone named
Khan may be involved."
The silence at the other end of the line went on so long that Bourne was forced to say,
"Jacques? Are you there?"
"Yes, mon ami. You startled me, that's all." Robbinet took a deep breath. "This Khan,
he is known to us. He's a professional assassin of the first rank. We ourselves know that
he's been responsible for over a dozen high-level hits worldwide."
"Whom does he target?"
"Mainly politicians—the president of Mali, for instance—but also from time to time
prominent business leaders. As far as we've been able to determine, he's neither political
nor an ideologue. He takes the commissions strictly for money. He believes in nothing
but that."
"The most dangerous kind of assassin."
"Of that there can be no doubt, mon ami" Robbinet said. "Do you suspect him of
murdering Alex?"
"It's possible," Bourne said. "I encountered him at Alex's estate just after I found the
bodies. It might have been he who called the police because they showed up while I was
still in the house." "A classic setup," Robbinet concurred.
Bourne was silent for a moment, his mind filled with Khan, who could have shot him
dead on campus or, later, from his vantage point in the willow. The fact that he didn't told
Bourne a great deal. This apparently wasn't a normal commission for Khan; his stalking
was personal, a vendetta of some sort that must have had its origins in the jungles of
Southeast Asia. The most logical assumption was the Bourne had killed Khan's father.
Now the son was out for revenge. Why else would he be obsessed with Bourne's family?
Why else would he ask about Bourne abandoning Jamie? This theory fit the
circumstances perfectly.

"What else can you tell me about Khan?" Bourne said now. "Very little," Robbinet
replied, "other than his age, which is twenty-seven." "He looks younger than that,"
Bourne mused. "Also, he's part Asian." "Rumor is he's half-Cambodian, but you know
how reliable rumors can be."
"And the other half?"
"Your guess is as good as mine. He's a loner, no known vices, residence unknown. He
burst on the scene six years ago, killing the prime minister of Sierra Leone. Before that,
it's as if he didn't exist."
Bourne checked his rear-view mirror. "So he made his first official kill when he was
twenty-one."
"Some coming-out party, eh?" Robbinet said dryly. "Listen, Jason, about this man
Khan, I can't overemphasize how dangerous he is. If he's involved in any way, you must
use extreme caution." "You sound frightened, Jacques."
"I am, man ami. Where Khan is concerned, there's no shame in it. You should be, too.
A healthy dose of fear makes one cautious, and believe me, now is a time for caution."
"I'll keep that in mind," Bourne said. He maneuvered through traffic, looking for the
right exit. "Alex was working on something, and I think he was killed because of it. You
don't know anything about what he was involved with, do you?"
"I saw Alex here in Paris perhaps six months ago. We had dinner. My impression was
that he was terribly preoccupied. But you know Alex, always secretive as the tomb."
Robbinet sighed. "His death is a terrible loss for all of us."
Bourne turned off the Beltway at the Route 123 exit, drove to Tysons Corner. "Does
'NX 20' mean anything to you?"
"That's all you have? NX 20?"
He drove to the Tysons Corner center parking terrace C. "More or less. Look up a
name: Dr. Felix Schiffer." He spelled it out. "He works for DARPA."
"Ah, now you have given me something useful. Let me see what I can do."
Bourne gave him his cell phone number as he exited the car. "Listen, Jacques, I'm on
my way to Budapest but I'm just about out of cash."
"No problem," Robbinet said. "Shall we use our same arrangement?"
Bourne had no idea what that was. He had no choice but to agree.
"Bon. How much?"
He went up the escalator, past Aviary Court. "A hundred thousand should do it. I'll be
staying at the Danubius Grand Hotel under Alex's name. Mark the packet 'Hold for
Arrival.'"
"Mais oui, Jason. It will be done just as you wish. Is there any other assistance I can
provide?"
"Not at the moment." Bourne saw Deron up ahead, standing outside a store called Dry
Ice. "Thanks for everything, Jacques."
"Remember caution, man ami" Robbinet said before signing off. "With Khan in the
field, anything can happen."

Deron had spotted Bourne and began walking at a slower pace so Bourne could catch
up to him. He was a slight man with skin the color of cocoa, a chiseled, high-cheekboned
face and eyes that flashed his keen intelligence. With his lightweight coat, smartly
tailored suit and gleaming leather attache case, he looked every inch the businessman. He
smiled as they walked side by side through the mall.
"It's good to see you, Jason."
"Too bad the circumstances are so dire."
Deron laughed. "Hell, when disaster strikes is the only time I see you!"
While they spoke, Bourne was gauging sight lines, assessing escape routes, checking
faces.
Deron unlocked his briefcase, handed Bourne a slim packet. "Passport and contacts."
"Thanks." Bourne put the packet away. "I'll get payment to you within the week."
"Whenever." Deron waved a long-fingered artist's hand. "Your credit is good with me."
He handed Bourne another item. "Dire situations require extreme measures."
Bourne held the gun in his hand. "What is this made of? It's so light."
"Ceramic and plastic. Something I've been working on for a couple of months now,"
Deron said with no little pride. "Not useful for distance but spot-on at close range."
"Plus, it won't be picked up at the airport," Bourne said.
Deron nodded. "Ammo, as well." He handed Bourne a small cardboard box. "Plastictipped ceramic, makes up for the small caliber. Another plus, look here, see these vents
on the barrel—they dissipate the noise of percussion. The firing makes almost no sound."
Bourne frowned. "Doesn't that cut down on the stopping power?"
Deron laughed. "Old school ballistics, m'man. Believe me, you take someone down
with this, they stay down."
"Deron, you're a man of unusual talents."
"Hey, I gotta be me." The forger sighed deeply. "Copying the Old Masters has its
charm, I suppose. You cannot believe how much I've learned studying their techniques.
On the other hand, the world you opened up to me—a world no one else here in this
entire mall but us knows exists—now that is what I call excitement." A wind had come
up, a damp harbinger of change, and he raised the collar of his coat against it. "I admit I
once harbored a secret desire to market some of my more unusual products to people like
you." He shook his head. "But no more. What I do now on the side, I do for fun."
Bourne saw a man in a trench coat stop in front of a store window to light up a
cigarette. He was still standing there, seemingly gazing at the shoes on display. The
trouble was, they were women's shoes. Bourne gave a hand signal and they both turned to
their left, walking away from the shoe store. In a moment Bourne used the available
reflective surfaces to glance behind them. The man in the trench coat was nowhere to be
seen.
Bourne hefted the gun, which seemed light as air. "How much?" he said. Deron
shrugged. "It's a prototype. Let's say this, you name the price based on its use to you. I
trust you'll be fair."

When Ethan Hearn had first come to Budapest, it had taken him some time to get used
to the fact that Hungarians were as literal as they were deliberate. Accordingly, the bar
Underground was situated in Pest at 30 Terez Koruta, in a cellar beneath a cinema. Being
below a movie theater also adhered to the Hungarian idiosyncrasy, for Underground was
an homage to the well-known Hungarian film by Emir Kusticura of the same name. As
far as Hearn was concerned, the bar was postmodern in the ugliest sense of the word.
Steel beams were visible across the ceiling, interspersed with a line of gigantic factory
fans that blew the smoke-thickened air down around the drinking and dancing denizens.
But what Hearn liked least about Underground was the music—a loud and cacophonous
mixture of aggrieved garage rock and sweaty funk.
Oddly, László Molnar did not seem to mind. In fact, he appeared to want to stay out
among the hip-swaying crowd, as if reluctant to return home. There was something brittle
about his manner, Hearn thought, in his quick abrasive laugh, the way his eyes roamed
the room, never alighting on anything or anyone for long, as if he carried a dark and
corrosive secret close under his skin. Hearn's occupation caused him to run up against a
great deal of money. He wondered, not for the first time, whether so much wealth could
have a ruinous effect on the human psyche. Perhaps this was the reason he had never
aspired to riches.
Molnar insisted on ordering for both of them, a nastily sweet cocktail called a
Causeway Spray that involved whiskey, ginger ale, Triple Sec and lemon. They found a
table in a corner where Hearn could barely see the small menu and continued their
discussion of opera, which, given the venue, seemed absurd.
It was after his second drink that Hearn spotted Spalko, standing in the haze at the rear
of the club. His boss caught his eye, and Hearn excused himself. Two men were loitering
near Spalko. They did not look as if they belonged at Underground, but then, Hearn told
himself, neither did he or Laszl6 Molnar. Spalko led him down a dim corridor lit with pin
lights like stars. He opened a narrow door into what Hearn imagined was the manager's
office. No one was inside.
"Good evening, Ethan." Spalko smiled as he closed the door behind them. "It appears
you have lived up to your billing. Well done!" "Thank you, sir."
"And now," Spalko said with great bonhomie, "it is time for me to take over."
Hearn could hear the bone-jarring thump of the electronic bass through the walls.
"Don't you think I ought to stay around long enough to introduce you?"
"Not necessary, I assure you. Time for you to get some rest." He looked at his watch.
"In fact, given the late hour, why don't you take tomorrow off." Hearn bridled. "Sir, I
couldn't—" Spalko laughed. "You can, Ethan, and you will." "But you told me in no
uncertain terms—"
"Ethan, I have the power to make policy and I have the power to make exceptions to it.
When your sleeper-sofa arrives, you can do what you want, but tomorrow you have off."
"Yes, sir." The young man ducked his head, grinning sheepishly. He hadn't had a day
off in three years. A morning in bed with nothing to do but read the paper, spread orange
marmalade on his toast, sounded like heaven to him. "Thank you. I am most grateful."
"Go on, then. By the time you're back in the office, I'll have read and made suggestions
on your pitch letter." He guided Hearn out of the overheated office. When he saw the

young man mount the steps to the front door, he nodded to the two men flanking him and
they set off through the frenetic hubbub of the bar.
Laszl6 Molnar had begun peering through the fog of smoke and colored lights for his
new friend. When Hearn had gotten up, he had been engrossed in the gyrating backside
of a young girl in a short skirt, but he'd finally noticed that Hearn had been gone longer
than expected. Molnar was taken aback when instead of Hearn the two men sat down on
either side of him.
"What is this?" he said, his voice cracking in fright. "What do you want?" The men
said nothing. The one on his right clamped him with a fearsome strength that made him
wince. He was too much in shock to cry out, but even if he had had the presence of mind
to do so, the incessant clangor of the club would have drowned him out. As it was, he sat
petrified as the man on his left jabbed his thigh with a syringe. It was over so quickly,
done so discreetly under the table that no one could possibly notice.
It took but thirty seconds for the drug Molnar had been injected with to take effect. His
eyes rolled up in their sockets and his body went limp. The two men were prepared for
this, and they held him up as they rose, maneuvering him to a standing position.
"Can't hold his liquor," one of the men said to a nearby patron. He laughed. "What can
you do with people like that?" The patron shrugged and, grinning, returned to his dancing.
No one else gave them a second look as they took Laszl6 Molnar out of Underground.
Spalko was waiting for them in a long, sleek BMW. They bundled the unconscious
Molnar into the trunk of the car, then scrambled into the front, one behind the wheel, the
other in the front passenger's seat.
The night was bright and clear. A full moon rode low in the sky. It seemed to Spalko
that all he need do was reach out a finger and he could flick it like a marble across the
black velvet table of the sky. "How did it go?" he asked.
"Sweet as honey," the driver replied as he fired the ignition.
Bourne got out of Tysons Corner as quickly as he could. Though he had deemed it a
secure place for his rendezvous with Deron, security for him was now a relative word. He
drove to the Wal-Mart on New York Avenue. It was in the belly of the city, a busy
enough area for him to feel that he would have some anonymity.
He pulled into the lot between 12th and 13th Streets across the avenue and parked. The
sky had begun to fill up with clouds; it was ominously dark on the southern horizon.
Inside, he picked out clothes, toiletry items, a battery charger for the cell phone, along
with a number of other items. Then he searched for a backpack in which he could easily
stow everything. Waiting on the checkout line, shuffling along with everyone else, he felt
his anxiety mounting. He seemed to look at no one, but in reality he was keeping his eye
out for any untoward attention directed his way.
Too many thoughts crowded his mind. He was a fugitive from the Agency with what
amounted to a price on his head. He was being stalked by a strangely arresting young
man of extraordinary talents who just happened to be one of the most accomplished
international assassins in the world. He had lost his two best friends, one of whom
appeared to be involved in what was clearly an exceedingly dangerous extracurricular
activity.

Thus preoccupied, he missed the chief security guard walking behind him. Early this
morning a government agent had briefed him on the fugitive, handing him the same
photo he'd seen last night on TV, asking him to keep an eagle eye out for the perp. The
agent had explained that his visit was part of the dragnet, him and other CIA agents going
around to all the major stores, movie theaters and the like, making sure the security
people knew that finding this Jason Bourne should be their number-one priority. The
guard felt a combination of pride and fear as he turned right around, went into his office
cubicle and dialed the number the agent had given him.
Moments after the guard hung up the phone, Bourne was in the men's room. Using the
electric clipper he had bought, he shaved off almost all his hair. Then he changed clothes,
pulling on jeans, a red-and-white checked cowboy shirt with pearl-tone buttons and a pair
of Nike running shoes. At the mirror in front of the line of sinks, he pulled out the small
pots he had purchased at the makeup counter. He applied the contents of these judiciously,
deepening the skin tone of his face. Another product thickened his brows, making them
more prominent. The contact lenses Deron had provided turned his gray eyes a dull
brown. Occasionally, he was obliged to pause as someone entered or washed up, but
mainly the men's room was deserted.
When he was finished, he stared at himself in the mirror. Not quite satisfied, he gave
himself a mole, prominently displayed high up on one cheek. Now the transformation
was complete. Donning his backpack, he went out, through the store, heading toward the
glass-encased front entrance.
Martin Lindros was in Alexandria, picking up the pieces of the botched termination at
Lincoln Fine Tailors when he had gotten the call from the chief security officer at the
Wal-Mart on New York Avenue. This morning he had decided that he and Detective
Harry Harris would split up, canvassing the area with their respective squads. Lindros
knew that Harris was a couple of miles closer than he was because the state policeman
had checked in not ten minutes ago. He was in a diabolical quandary. He knew he was
going to catch six kinds of hell from the DCI because of the Fine fiasco. If the Old Man
found out that he had allowed a state police detective to arrive at Jason Bourne's lastknown location before him, he'd never hear the end of it. It was a bad situation, he
thought as he gunned his car. But the overriding priority was to get Bourne. All at once
he made his decision. To hell with interdepartmental secrets and jealousies, he thought.
He toggled his phone on, got Harris on the line, gave him the Wal-Mart address.
"Harry, listen carefully, you are to make a silent approach. Your job is to secure the
area. You are to make sure Webb does not escape, nothing more. Under no circumstances
are you to show yourself or try to apprehend him. Is that clear? I'm only minutes behind
you."
I'm not as stupid as I look, Harry Harris thought as he coordinated the three patrol cars
he had under his command. And I'm certainly not as stupid as Lindros thinks I am. He'd
had more than adequate experience with federal types and he had yet to like what he had
seen. The feds had ingrained in them this superior attitude, as if the other police forces
were clueless, had to be led around like children. This attitude was like a bone stuck in
Harris' craw. Lindros interrupted him when he had tried to tell him of his own theories, so

why should he bother to share them now? Lindros saw him as nothing more than a pack
mule, someone so grateful to be chosen to work with the CIA that he would follow orders
unfailingly and unquestioningly. It was clear to Harris now that he was totally out of the
loop. Lindros had deliberately failed to inform him of the Alexandria sighting. Harris had
only learned about it by accident. As he turned into the Wal-Mart parking lot, he decided
to take full control of the situation while he still had the chance. His mind made up, he
grabbed his two-way radio, began barking orders to his men.
Bourne was near the entrance to the Wal-Mart when three Virginia State Police cars
came barreling down New York Avenue, sirens blaring. He shrank back into shadows.
There could be no doubt, they were heading directly for the Wal-Mart. He'd been made,
but how? No time to worry about that now. He had to work out an escape plan.
The patrol cars screeched to a halt, blocking traffic, causing immediate irate shouts
from motorists. Bourne could think of only one reason why they were out of their
jurisdiction. They had been recruited by the Agency. The D.C. Metro Police would be
livid.
He pulled out Alex's cell phone, dialed the police emergency line.
"This is Detective Morran of the Virginia State Police," he said. "I want to speak to a
district commander pronto."
"This is Third District Commander Burton Philips," a steely voice said in his ear.
"Listen, Philips, you boys were told in no uncertain terms to keep your noses out of our
business. Now I find your cruisers showing up at the Wal-Mart on New York Avenue and
I—"
"You're in the heart of the district, Morran. What the hell are you doing poaching on
my jurisdiction?"
"That's my business," Bourne said in his nastiest voice. "Just get on the horn and pull
your goddamned boys out of my hair."
"Morran, I don't know where you get your shit attitude, but it won't play with me. I
swear I'll be there in three minutes to tear your balls off myself!"
By this time the street was swarming with cops. Instead of retreating back to the store,
Bourne, keeping his left knee rigid, limped calmly out along with perhaps a dozen other
shoppers. Half of the contingent of cops, led by a tall stoop-shouldered detective with a
haggard face, quickly scanned the faces of the dozen, Bourne included, as they rushed
inside the store. The remaining cops fanned out in the parking lot. Some were securing
New York Avenue between 12th and 13th Streets, others were busy ensuring that newly
arriving patrons remained in their cars; still others were on their walkie-talkies,
coordinating traffic.
Instead of heading for his car, Bourne turned to his right, went around the corner
toward the loading dock at the rear of the building where the deliveries came in. Up
ahead, he could see three or four semis parked, in the process of being unloaded.
Diagonally across the street was Franklin Park. He set off in that direction.
Someone shouted at him. He kept on walking as if he hadn't heard.
Sirens screamed and he glanced his watch. Commander Burton Philips was right on
time. He was halfway down the side of the building when the shouts came again, more

commanding. Then there was a welter of harsh voices, raised in heated expletive-laden
argument.
He turned, saw the stoop-shouldered detective, his service revolver out. Behind the
detective came running the tall, imposing figure of Commander Philips, silver hair
shining, his heavy-jowled face in high color from exertion and rage. In the fashion of
dignitaries the world over, he was flanked by a pair of heavyweights armed with scowls
as big as their shoulders. They had their right hands on their sidearms, apparently ready
to blast to smithereens anyone foolish enough to intervene in their commander's wishes.
"You in charge of these Virginia troopers?" Philips called.
"State police," the stoop-shouldered detective said. "And, yeah, I'm in charge." He
frowned as he saw the D.C. Metro uniforms. "What in hell are you doing here? You'll
muck up my operation."
"Your operation!" Commander Philips was apoplectic. "Get the hell out of my swamp,
you fucking hick bastard!"
The detective's narrow face went white. "Who are you calling a fucking hick bastard?"
Bourne left them to it. The park was out now; having come under the detective's
scrutiny, he needed a more immediate means of escape. Slipping to the end of the
building, he went down the row of semis until he found one that had already been
unloaded. He climbed into the cab. The key was in the ignition and he turned it over.
With a basso profundo rumble, the truck started up.
"Hey, where ya think you're goin', dude?"
The driver yanked open the door. He was a huge man with a neck like a tree stump and
arms to match. As he swung up, he grabbed a sawed-off shotgun from a hidden berth
above his head. Bourne slammed a balled fist into the bridge of his nose. Blood flew, the
driver's eyes went out of focus and he lost his grip on the shotgun.
"Sorry, dude," Bourne said as he delivered a blow designed to render even a man of the
trucker's oxlike size unconscious. Hauling him into the passenger's seat by the back of his
studded belt, Bourne slammed the door closed and put the semi in gear.
At that moment, he became aware of a new presence on the scene. A youngish man
had come between the two law-enforcement antagonists, pushing them roughly apart.
Bourne recognized him: Martin Lindros, the Agency's DDCI. So the Old Man had put
Lindros in domestic charge of the sanction. That was bad news. Through Alex, Bourne
knew that Lindros was exceptionally bright; he would not be so easy to outfox, as
evidenced by the tightly designed net in Old Town.
All this was technically moot now because Lindros had spotted the semi moving out of
the parking lot and was trying to wave it down.
"No one leaves the area!" he shouted.
Bourne ignored him, depressed the accelerator. He knew he couldn't afford to have a
face to face with Lindros; with his field expertise the man might see through his disguise.
Lindros drew his gun. Bourne could see him running toward the galvanized steel gates
through which Bourne would have to pass, waving and shouting as he went.

Up ahead, responding to his screamed orders, two Virginia state cops stationed there
hastily shut the gates, while an Agency vehicle plowed its way past the blockade of New
York Avenue, on an intercept course with the semi.
Bourne jammed his foot down on the gas pedal, and like a wounded behemoth, the
semi lurched forward. At the last moment, the cops leaped out of the way as he barreled
through the gates, ripping them off their hinges so that they spun high in the air, crashed
down on either side of him. He downshifted, turning hard to the right, heading up the
street at an ever-increasing speed.
Glancing in the driver's oversized side mirror, he could see the Agency car slowing
down. The passenger's door popped open and Lindros leaped in, slamming the door shut
after him. The car took off like a rocket, gaining on the semi with little difficulty. Bourne
knew that he could not outrun the Agency car with this lumbering beast, but its size, a
drawback as far as speed was concerned, could be an asset in other ways.
He allowed the car to tailgate him. Without warning, it accelerated faster, coming up
on his side of the cab. He saw Martin Lindros, his lips compressed in a line of
concentration, holding his gun in one hand, his arm locked, steadying it with the other.
Unlike actors in action films, he knew how to fire a gun from a speeding vehicle.
Just as he was about to pull the trigger, Bourne swerved the semi to the left. The
Agency vehicle slammed into its side; Lindros put his gun up as the driver fought to keep
the car away from the line of parked cars on the other side.
The moment the driver was able to swerve back into the street, Lindros began firing at
the semi's cab. His angle was not good and he was being jolted incessantly, but the
fusillade was enough to make Bourne turn the cab to the right. One bullet had smashed
his side window and two others had penetrated the backseat, lodging in the trucker's side.
"Goddammit, Lindros," Bourne said. Dire as his circumstances were, he did not want
this innocent man's blood on his hands. He was already heading west; George
Washington University Hospital was on 23rd Street, not that far away. He made a right,
then a left onto K Street, thundering along, sounding his air horn as he went through
traffic lights. A motorist on 18th, possibly half-asleep at the wheel, missed the warning,
slammed head-on into the right rear of the semi. Bourne slewed dangerously, fought the
truck back to center, kept going. Lindros' car was still behind him, stuck there because K
Street, a divided thoroughfare with a planted median, was too narrow for the driver to
creep up his side.
By the time he crossed 20th Street, he could see the underpass that would take him
beneath Washington Circle. The hospital was a block away from there. Glancing behind
him, he saw that the Agency car was no longer behind him. He had been planning to take
22nd Street down to the hospital, but just as he was about the make the left, he saw the
Agency car come speeding toward him on 22nd. Lindros leaned out the window and
began to fire in his methodical manner.
Bourne tramped on the gas and the truck leaped forward. He was now committed to
going through the underpass, coming around to the hospital on the far side. But as he
approached the underpass, he realized something was wrong. The tunnel beneath
Washington Circle was completely dark; no daylight at all showed at the far end. That
could mean only one thing: a roadblock had been set up, a fortress of vehicles set across
both lanes of K Street.

He entered the underpass at speed, downshifting, stamping down hard on the air brakes
only when he was engulfed in darkness. At the same time, he kept the heel of his hand on
the air horn. The screaming noise ricocheted off the stone and concrete until it became
deafening, concealing the shriek of the tires as Bourne turned the wheel hard to the left,
rolling the cab of the truck over the divider so that the vehicle was turned at right angles
to the road. He was out of the cab in an instant, sprinting the north wall behind the
protection of the last car to come barreling through in the other direction. It had stopped
for a moment as the driver rubbernecked the accident, then as more police arrived it had
taken off. The semi was between him and his pursuers, stretched from wall to wall across
both lanes of K Street. He scrabbled around for the steel maintenance ladder bolted to the
tunnel wall, leaped up it and began to climb just as floodlights were switched on. He
turned his head away, closed his eyes and kept climbing.
A few moments later he saw the lights illuminating the truck and the roadbed beneath
it. Bourne, almost to the curved top of the underpass, could make out Martin Lindros. He
spoke into a walkie-talkie, and floodlights came on from the opposite direction. They had
the semi in a pincer grip. Agents were running toward the truck from both ends of K
Street, guns at the ready.
"Sir, there's someone in the truck's cab." The agent moved closer. "He's been shot; he's
bleeding pretty bad."
Lindros was running, his face bursting into the floodlit field, lined with tension. "Is it
Bourne?"
High above them, Bourne had gained the maintenance hatch. He slid back the bolt,
opened it, found himself amidst the decorative trees that lined Washington Circle. All
around him, traffic raced, a relentless procession of blurred motion that never ceased. In
the tunnel below him, the wounded trucker was being taken to the nearby hospital. Now
it was time for Bourne to save himself.

CHAPTER NINE
Khan had accumulated too much respect for David Webb's skill for vanishing to have
wasted time trying to find him in the swirling mass of people in Old Town. Instead, he
had concentrated on the Agency men, shadowing them back to Lincoln Fine Tailors,
where they met with Martin Lindros for the sorry debriefing following the botched
termination. He observed them talking to the tailor. In accordance with standard
intimidation practices, they had taken him out of his own environment—in this case, his
shop— stuffing him into the backseat of one of their cars, where he had been detained
without explanation, squeezed between two stone-faced agents. From what he had
gathered from the conversation he overheard between Lindros and the agents, they had
gotten nothing of substance from the tailor. He claimed the agents had arrived at his shop
with such speed that Webb had had no time to tell him why he had come. As a
consequence, the agents recommended cutting him loose. Lindros had agreed, but after
the tailor had returned to his shop, Lindros had posted two new agents in an unmarked
car across the street just in case Webb tried to contact him a second time.

Now, twenty minutes after Lindros had left them, the agents were bored. They'd eaten
their donuts and drunk their Cokes and were sitting in their car grumbling about being
stuck here on surveillance duty when their brethren were off running down the notorious
agent, David Webb.
"Not David Webb," the heavier of the two agents said. "The DCI has decreed that we
call him by his operational name, Jason Bourne."
Khan, who was still close enough to hear every word, went rigid. He had, of course,
heard of Jason Bourne. For many years, Bourne had had the reputation of being the most
accomplished international killer-for-hire on the planet. Khan, knowing his field the way
he did, had discounted half the stories as fabrications, the other half as exaggeration. It
was simply not possible for one man to have had the daring, the expertise, the sheer
animal cunning attributed to Jason Bourne. In fact, a part of him disbelieved in Bourne's
existence altogether.
And yet, here were these CIA agents speaking about David Webb as Jason Bourne!
Khan felt as if his brain was about to explode. He was shaken to his very foundation.
David Webb wasn't simply a college professor of linguistics as Spalko's dossier had
claimed, he was one of the field's great assassins. He was the man who Khan had been
playing cat-and-mouse with since yesterday. So many things came together for him, not
the least of which was how Bourne had made him in the park. Changing his face and hair
and even his gait had always been enough to fool people in the past. But now he was
dealing with Jason Bourne, an agent whose skills and expertise at, among other things,
disguise were legendary and quite possibly the equal of his own. Bourne wasn't going to
be gulled by the normal tricks of the trade, clever though they might be. Khan understood
that he was going to have to raise the level of his game if he was going to win.
Fleetingly, he wondered if Webb's real identity was another fact Stepan Spalko had
known when he had handed Khan the expurgated file. Considering it further, Khan
believed that he had to have known. It was the only explanation for why Spalko had
arranged to pin the murders of Conklin and Panov on Bourne. It was a classic
disinformation technique. As long as the Agency believed that Bourne was responsible,
they had no reason to look elsewhere for the real murderer—and surely they would have
no chance to uncover the truth about why the two men were killed. Spalko was clearly
trying to use Khan as a pawn in some larger game, the way he was using Bourne. Khan
had to find out what Spalko was up to—he would not be anyone's pawn.
To unearth the truth behind the murders, Khan knew he had to get to the tailor. Never
mind what he had told the Agency. Having followed Webb—it was still difficult for
Khan to think of him as Jason Bourne—he knew the tailor Fine had had plenty of time to
cough up what information he possessed. Once during his observation of the scene, the
tailor Fine had turned his head, staring out the car window, and Khan had taken the
opportunity to look into his eyes. He knew him, then, for a proud and obstinate man.
Khan's Buddhist nature caused him to look upon pride as an undesirable trait, but in this
situation he could see that it had served Fine well because the harder the Agency pushed
him, the deeper he had dug in his heels. The Agency would get nothing out of him, but
Khan knew how to neutralize pride as well as obstinacy.
Taking off his suede jacket, he ripped part of the lining enough so that the agents on
stake-out would see him as nothing more than another Lincoln Fine Tailors customer.

Crossing the street, he entered the shop, the musical bell tinkling behind him. One of
the Latina women looked up from reading the newspaper comics pages, her lunch, a
Tupperware container of beans and rice, half-eaten in front of her. She came over, asked
if she could help him. She was voluptuously built, with a firm, wide brow and large
chocolate eyes. He told her that as the ripped jacket was a favorite of his, he'd come to
see Mr. Fine himself. The woman nodded. She disappeared into the back and, a moment
later, came out and sat down at her position without saying another word to Khan.
Several minutes passed before Leonard Fine appeared. He looked much the worse for
his long and thoroughly unpleasant morning. Truth to tell, such close and intimate
proximity to the Agency as he had endured seemed to have drained him of vitality.
"How can I help you, sir? Maria tells me you have a jacket in need of restoration."
Khan spread the suede jacket out on the counter inside out.
Fine touched it with the same delicacy with which a doctor palpates an ill patient. "Oh,
it's just the lining. Lucky for you. Suede is almost impossible to repair."
"Never mind that," Khan said in a low whisper. "I am here on orders from Jason
Bourne. I'm his representative."
Fine did an admirable job of keeping his face closed. "I've no idea what you're talking
about."
"He thanks you for your part in his successful escape from the Agency," Khan went on
as if Fine hadn't spoken. "And he wants you to know that even now two agents are spying
on you."
Fine winced slightly. "I expected as much. Where are they?" His knobby fingers were
kneading the jacket anxiously.
"Just across the street," Khan said. "In the white Ford Taurus."
Fine was canny enough not to look. "Maria," he said just loud enough for the Latina to
hear, "is there a white Ford Taurus parked across the street?"
Maria turned her head. "Yes, Mr. Fine."
"Can you see if anyone's in it?"
"Two men," Maria said. "Tall, crew-cut. Very Dick Tracy, like the ones who were in
here earlier."
Fine swore under his breath. His eyes rose to meet Khan's. "Tell, Mr. Bourne ... tell
him that Leonard Fine says, 'May God go with him.'"
Khan's expression was impassive. He found thoroughly distasteful the American habit
of invoking God in almost any instance one cared to name. "I need some information."
"Of course." Fine nodded gratefully. "Whatever you want."
Martin Lindros finally understood the meaning of the phrase 'So angry he could spit
blood.' How was he ever going to face the Old Man, knowing that Jason Bourne had
evaded him, not once but twice.
"What the hell d'you think you were doing disobeying my direct orders?" he screamed
at the top of his lungs. Noises were echoing in the tunnel underneath Washington Circle
as DOT personnel were trying to extricate the semi from the position in which Bourne
had lodged it.

"Hey, listen, it was me who spotted the subject leaving the Wal-Mart."
"And subsequently let him get away!"
"That was you, Lindros. I had an irate district commander chewing up my ass!"
"And that's another thing!" Lindros yelled. "What the fuck was he doing there?"
"You tell me, wise guy, you're the one who fucked things up in Alexandria. If you'd
bothered to clue me in, I could've helped you canvass Old Town. I know it like I know
my own face. But no, you're the fed, you know better, you're the one running the show."
"Damn right, I am! I've already directed my people to call all personnel stationed at the
airports, train terminals, bus stations, rental car agencies to be on the lookout for
Bourne."
"Don't be absurd, even if you hadn't tied my hands behind my back, I lack the authority
to make those kinds of calls. But I do have my men scouring the area and let's not forget
that it was my detailed last best description of Bourne you disseminated to all the
transportation egress points."
Even though Harris was right, Lindros continued to fume. "I demand to know why the
hell you dragged the D.C. Metro Police into it? If you needed more backup, you
should've come to me."
"Why the fuck should I come to you, Lindros? Can you give me a reason? Are you my
asshole buddy or something? Are we collaborating, anything along that line? Fuck no."
Harris had a disgusted look on his lugubrious face. "And for the record, I didn't send for
the D.C. I told you, he was on my ass from the second he showed up, frothing at the
mouth about my poaching on his jurisdiction."
Lindros barely heard him. The ambulance, its light flashing, its siren screaming, was
taking off, ferrying the truck driver he had inadvertently shot to George Washington
University Hospital. It had taken them nearly forty-five minutes to secure the area, mark
it off as a crime scene and extricate him from the cab. Would he live or die? Lindros
didn't want to think about that now. It would be easy to say that his injury was Bourne's
fault— he knew the Old Man would see it that way. But the DCI had a crust formed of
two parts pragmatism and one part bitterness that Lindros knew he could never match,
and thank God for that. Whatever the trucker's fate now, he knew he was responsible, and
this knowledge served as the perfect fuel for his antagonism. He may not have had the
DCFs cynical crust, but he was not in the market of beating himself up for actions long
past remedy. Instead, he spewed the poisonous feeling outward.
"Forty-five minutes!" Harris grunted as an ambulance cut its way through the backedup traffic. "Christ, that poor bastard could've died ten times over!"
"Civil servants!"
"You're a civil servant, Harry, if memory serves," Lindros said nastily.
"And you aren't?"
The venom rose up in Lindros. "Listen, you over-the-hill fuck, I am made of different
cloth than the rest of you. My training—"
"All your training didn't help you to catch Bourne, Lindros! You had two chances and
you blew them both!"
"And what did you do to help?"

Khan watched Lindros and Harris going at it. In his DOT overalls, he looked like
everyone else on the scene. No one questioned his comings or goings. He had been
passing close by the rear of the semi, ostensibly examining the damage done by the car
that had rammed into it when he had noticed in the shadows the iron ladder that rose
along the side of the tunnel. He looked up, craning his neck. He wondered where it led.
Had Bourne wondered the same thing, or had he already known? Now, glancing around
to make sure no one was looking in his direction, he quickly climbed the ladder, out of
the range of the police spotlights, where no one could see him. He found the hatch and
was not surprised to discover the slide bolt newly opened. He pushed the hatch open,
went up.
From the vantage point of Washington Circle, he turned slowly in a clockwise
direction, scanning all things near and far. A gathering wind whipped about his face. The
sky had darkened further, looking bruised by the hammerblows of thunder, muffled by
distance, that rolled now and again through the canyons and wide European-style avenues
of the city. To the west was Rock Creek Parkway, Whitehurst Freeway and Georgetown.
To the north rose the modern towers of Hotel Row—the ANA, Grand, Park Hyatt, and
Marriott, and Rock Creek beyond. To the west was K Street, running past McPherson
Square and Franklin Park. To the south was Foggy Bottom, sprawling George
Washington University, the massive monolith of the State Department. Farther out, where
the Potomac River bent to the east, widening out to form the placid bywaters of the Tidal
Basin, he saw a silver mote, a plane hanging almost motionless, shining like a mirror,
caught high up above the thickening clouds by a last bolt of sunlight before it began its
descent into Washington National Airport.
Khan's nostrils dilated as if he had caught a scent of his quarry. The airport was where
Bourne was going. He was certain of it because, had he been in Bourne's shoes, that was
where he would be right now.
The terrible portent of David Webb and Jason Bourne being one and the same man had
been marinating in his mind ever since he had heard Lindros and his CIA brethren
discussing it. The very idea that he and Bourne were in the same profession felt like an
outrage to him, a violation of everything he had painstakingly built for himself. It had
been he—and only he—who had drawn himself out of the mire of the jungles. That he
had survived those hateful early years was a miracle in itself. But at least those early days
had been his and his alone. Now to find himself sharing the stage he had committed
himself to conquering with, of all people, David Webb seemed like a cruel jest as well as
an intolerable injustice. It was a wrong that must be rectified, the sooner the better. Now
he could not wait to confront Bourne, to tell him the truth, to see in his eyes how that
revelation would destroy him from the inside out as Khan bled him of life.

CHAPTER TEN
Bourne stood in the glass and chrome shadows of the International Departures building.
Washington National Airport was a madhouse, thronged with businessmen with laptops
and carry-ons, families with multiple suitcases; children with Mickey Mouse, Power

Ranger and Teddy bear backpacks; the elderly in wheelchairs; a group of proselytizing
Mormons on their way to the Third World; lovers hand in hand, tickets to paradise. But
despite the crowds, there was an emptiness about airports. As a result, Bourne saw
nothing but empty stares, the inward look that was the human being's instinctual defense
against fearful boredom.
It was an irony not lost on him that in airports, where waiting was an institution, time
seemed to stand still. Not for him. Now, every minute counted, bringing him closer to
termination by the very people he used to work for.
In the fifteen minutes he had been here he had seen a dozen suspicious
plainclothesmen. Some were prowling the departure lounges, smoking, drinking from big
paper cups, as if they could blend in with the civilians. But most were at or near the
airline check-in counters, eyeballing the passengers as they queued up to have their bags
checked and receive their boarding passes. Bourne saw almost immediately that it was
going to be impossible for him to get on a commercial flight. What other choices were
there for him? He had to get to Budapest as quickly as possible.
He was wearing tan slacks, a cheap rain shell over a black turtleneck pullover, a pair of
Sperry Top-Sider shoes in lieu of the sneakers, which he had dropped in the trash bin,
along with a bundle of the other clothes he had on when he walked out of Wal-Mart.
Since he had been spotted there, it was vital that he change his profile as quickly as
possible. But now that he had assessed the situation at the terminal, he was not at all
happy with what he had chosen.
Avoiding the roaming agents, he went outside into a night fizzing with a fine rain,
picked up a shuttle bus that would take him to the Cargo Air Terminal. He sat right
behind the driver, striking up a conversation with him. His name was Ralph. Bourne had
introduced himself as Joe. They shook hands briefly as the shuttle braked at a pedestrian
crosswalk.
"Hey, I'm supposed to meet my cousin at OnTime Cargo," Bourne said, "but stupid me,
I lost the directions he gave me."
"What's he do?" Ralph said, pulling ahead into the fast lane.
"He's a pilot." Bourne shifted closer. "He was desperate to fly with American or Delta,
but you know how it goes."
Ralph nodded his head in sympathy. "The rich get richer and the poor get shafted." He
had a button nose, a mop of unruly hair and dark circles under his eyes. "Tell me about
it."
"Anyway, can you direct me?"
"I'll do better than that," Ralph said with a glance at Bourne in his long mirror. "My
shift's over when I get to the cargo terminal. I'll take you there myself."
Khan stood in the rain, the crystal lights of the airport all around him, and thought
matters through. Bourne would have smelled the Agency suits even before he spotted
them. Khan had counted more than fifty, which meant perhaps three times that many
sniffing their way throughout other sections of the airport. Bourne would know that he
could never get through them onto an overseas flight no matter how he changed his

clothing. They had made him at the Wal-Mart, they knew what he looked like now, he'd
heard as much in the underpass.
He could feel Bourne close by. Having sat next to him on the park bench, having
sensed the weight of him, the spread of his bones, the stretch of his muscles, the play of
light over the features of his face. He knew he was here. It was Bourne's face that he had
clandestinely studied in their brief moments together. He had been keenly aware of
needing to memorize every contour, how each expression changed those contours. What
had Khan been searching for in Bourne's expression when he had noted the other's
intense interest? Confirmation? Validation? Even he did not know. He only knew that the
image of Bourne's face had become part of his consciousness. For better or for worse,
Bourne had a hold on him.
They were bound together on the wheel of their own desires until the onset of death.
Khan looked around him once more. Bourne needed to get out of the city and possibly
country. But the Agency would be adding on personnel, expanding its search even as it
sought to tighten its noose. If it was Khan, he'd want to get out of the country as quickly
as possible, so he headed toward the International Arrivals building. Inside he stood in
front of a huge color-coded map of the airport, traced out the most efficient route to the
cargo terminal. With the commercial flights already under such tight security, if Bourne
was going to leave from this airport, his best chance would be aboard a cargo plane. Time
was a critical factor now for Bourne. It wouldn't be long before the Agency realized that
Bourne wasn't going to try to board a regular flight and began to monitor the cargo
shippers.
Khan went back out into the rain. Once he determined which flights were departing in
the next hour or so, all that remained would be to keep an eye out for Bourne and, should
he have guessed correctly, deal with him. He had no more illusions about the difficulty of
his task. Much to his shock and chagrin, Bourne had proved to be a clever, determined
and resourceful antagonist. He had hurt Khan, had trapped him, slipped away from his
grasp more than once. Khan knew that if he was to succeed this time, he would need a
way to surprise Bourne, knowing that Bourne would be on the lookout for him. In his
mind, the jungle called to him, repeating its message of death and destruction. The end of
his long journey was in sight. He would outwit Jason Bourne this one last time.
Bourne was the only passenger by the time they reached their destination. It was
raining harder, an early dusk settling in on the afternoon. The sky was indistinct, a blank
slate on which any future could now be written.
"OnTime's at Cargo Five, along with FedEx, Lufthansa and Customs." Ralph pulled
the bus over and turned off the ignition. They got out, half-ran across the tarmac to one in
a line of huge flat-roofed ugly buildings. "Right in here."
They went inside and Ralph shook rain off himself. He was a pear-shaped man, with
oddly delicate hands and feet. He pointed now to their left. "You see where U.S. Customs
is? Down the building, two stations past is where you'll find your cousin."
"Thanks a lot," Bourne said.
Ralph grinned and shrugged. "Don't mention it, Joe." He held out his hand. "Glad to
help."

As the driver ambled away, hands in his pockets, Bourne headed down toward
OnTime's offices. But he had no intention of going there—not yet, anyway. He turned,
following Ralph to a door that had affixed to it a sign reading no admittance—authorized
personnel only. He took out a credit card as he watched Ralph feed his laminated ID card
into a metal slot. The door swung open and, as Ralph disappeared inside, Bourne silently
darted forward, inserted the credit card. The door shut, just as it should have, but
Bourne's maneuver had prevented the lock from engaging. He counted silently to thirty in
order to make certain that Ralph was no longer near the door. Then he opened it,
pocketing his credit card as he went through.
He found himself in the maintenance locker room. The walls were of white tile; a
rubber webbing had been laid on top of the concrete floor to keep the men's bare feet dry
as they padded to and from the showers. Eight ranks of standard metal lockers were
arrayed in front of him, most with simple combination locks on them. Off to his right was
an opening to the showers and sinks. In a smaller space just beyond were the urinals and
toilets.
Bourne cautiously peered around the corner, saw Ralph padding toward one of the
showers. Closer to hand, another maintenance man was lathering up, his back to both
Bourne and Ralph. Bourne looked around, immediately saw Ralph's locker. The door was
slightly ajar, the combination lock hanging unhinged on the door handle itself. Of course.
In a secure place like this what was there to fear in leaving your locker open for the few
minutes it took to shower? Bourne opened the door wider, saw Ralph's ID tag lying atop
an undershirt on a metal shelf. He took it. Nearby was the other maintenance man's locker,
similarly open. He exchanged the locks, securing Ralph's locker. That should keep the
driver from discovering that his ID tag had been stolen for as long as Bourne hoped he'd
need.
He grabbed a pair of maintenance overalls from the open cart meant for laundering,
making sure the size was more or less right, then quickly changed. Then, with Ralph's ID
tag around his neck, he went out, walked quickly down to U.S. Customs, where he
obtained the current flight schedule. There was nothing to Budapest, but Rush Service
Flight 113 to Paris was leaving from Cargo Four in eighteen minutes. Nothing else was
scheduled within the next ninety minutes, but Paris was fine; it was a major hub for intraEuropean travel. Once there, he would have no trouble getting to Budapest.
Bourne hurried back out to the slick tarmac. The rain was now coming down in sheets,
but there was no lightning, and the thunder he had heard earlier was nowhere in evidence.
That was good, as he had no desire to see Flight 113 delayed for any reason. He picked
up his pace, hurrying to the next building, home to Cargo Three and Four.
He was drenched by the time he arrived inside the terminal. He looked to left and right,
hurried toward the Rush Service area. There were few people about, which was not good.
It was always easier to blend in with a crowd than with a sparse few. He found the door
marked for authorized personnel, slid his ID card into the slot. He heard the gratifying
click of the lock opening; he pushed on the door and went through. As he wended his
way through the cinder-block corridors, the rooms stacked high with packing crates, the
smells of resinous wood, sawdust and cardboard became overpowering. There was about
the place an air of impermanence, a sense of constant motion, of lives ruled by schedules

and weather, the anxiety of mechanical and human error. There was nothing to sit on, no
place to rest.
He kept his eyes straight ahead, walking with the air of authority that no one would
question. He soon came to another door, this one steel-clad. Through its small window,
he could see planes arrayed on the tarmac, loading and unloading. It did not take him
long to spot the Rush Service jet, its cargo bay door open. A fuel line ran from the plane
to a tanker truck. A man in a rain slicker, its hood up over his head, was monitoring the
gas flow. The pilot and co-pilot were in the cockpit going through their pre-flight
instrument check.
Just as he was about to slide Ralph's ID card into the slot, Alex's cell phone rang. It
was Robbinet.
"Jacques, it looks as if I'm about to head your way. Can you meet me at the airport in,
say, seven hours or so?"
"Mais oui, man ami. Call me when you land." He gave Bourne his cell phone number.
"I am delighted that I will be seeing you so soon."
Bourne knew what Robbinet was saying. He was pleased that Bourne was able to slip
through from the Agency's noose. Not yet, Bourne thought. Not quite yet. But his escape
was only moments away. In the meantime ...
"Jacques, what have you discovered? Have you found out what NX 20 is?"
"I am afraid not. No record of any such project exists."
Bourne's heart sank. "What about Dr. Schiffer?"
"Ah, there I had a bit more luck," Robbinet said. "A Dr. Felix Schiffer works for
DARPA—or at least he did."
A cold hand had wrapped around Bourne's gut. "What do you mean?"
Bourne could hear a rustling of paper, could imagine his friend reading through the
intel he had managed to procure from his sources in Washington. "Dr. Schiffer is no
longer on DARPA's 'active' roster. He left there thirteen months ago."
"What happened to him?"
"I've no idea."
"He simply dropped out of sight?" Bourne asked incredulously.
"In this day and age, as unlikely as it seems, that's just what happened."
Bourne closed his eyes for an instant. "No, no. He's around somewhere—he has to be."
"Then what—?"
"He's been 'disappeared'—by professionals."
With Felix Schiffer vanished, it was more imperative than ever that he get to Budapest
with all due haste. His only lead was the hotel key from the Danubius Grand Hotel. He
glanced at his watch. He was cutting it close. He had to go. Now. "Jacques, thanks for
sticking your neck out."
"I'm sorry I couldn't be of more help." Robbinet hesitated. "Jason ..."
"Yes?"
"Bon chance."

Bourne pocketed the cell phone, opened the stainless-steel-clad door, headed out into
the heavy weather. The sky was low and dark, sheets of rain slanting down, a shimmering
silver curtain in the airport's brilliant lights, running in glittering streamers over the
depressions in the tarmac. He walked slightly bent over into the wind, walking
purposefully, as he had before, a man who knew his job, wanted to get it done quickly
and efficiently. Rounding the nose of the jet, he could see the cargo bay door ahead of
him. The man fueling the jet had finished and had removed the nozzle from the tank.
Out of the corner of his eye, Bourne saw movement off to his left. One of Cargo Four's
doors had burst open and several airport security guards spilled out, weapons drawn.
Ralph must have gotten his locker open; Bourne had run out of time. He kept moving at
the same deliberate pace. He was almost at the cargo bay door when the fueler said, "Hey,
buddy, got the time? My watch stopped."
Bourne turned. At the same moment he recognized the Asian features of the face inside
the hood; Khan shot a burst of aviation fuel into his face. Bourne's hands came up and he
choked, completely blinded.
Khan rushed him, pushing him back against the slick metal skin of the fuselage. He
delivered two vicious blows, one to Bourne's solar plexus, one to the side of his head. As
Bourne's knees collapsed, Khan shoved him into the cargo hold.
Turning, Khan saw a cargo handler heading toward him. He lifted an arm. "It's okay,
I'll lock up," he said. Luck was with him, as the rain made it difficult for anyone to see
his face or his uniform. The cargo handler, grateful to get out of the rain and wind,
returned a salute of thanks. Khan slammed the cargo door shut, locked it. Then he
sprinted to the fuel truck, drove it far enough away from the plane so that it would not
look suspicious.
The security police that Bourne had spotted before were making their way down the
row of jets. They signaled to the pilot. Khan put the jet between himself and the
oncoming police. He reached up, unlocked the cargo bay door, swung himself inside.
Bourne was on his hands and knees, his head hanging down. Khan, surprised at his
recuperative powers, kicked him hard in the ribs. With a grunt, Bourne fell over on his
side, his arms wrapped around his waist.
Khan took out a length of cord. He pressed Bourne face-first onto the cargo bay deck,
took his arms behind his back and wrapped the wire around his crossed wrists. Over the
sound of the rain, he could hear the security police shouting to the pilot and co-pilot for
their IDs. Leaving Bourne incapacitated, Khan walked over and quietly pulled the bay
door closed.
For a few minutes Khan sat cross-legged in the darkness of the cargo bay. The pinging
of the rain on the skin of the fuselage set up an arrhythmic percussion that reminded him
of the drums in the jungle. He had been quite ill when he had heard those drums. To his
fever-stricken mind, they had sounded like the roaring of aircraft engines, the frantic
beating of the air about the outflow vents just before it begins a steep dive. The sound had
frightened him because of the memories it brought up, memories he had fought long and
hard to keep at the very bottom of his consciousness. Because of the fever, all his senses
were heightened to an almost painful pitch. He was aware that the jungle had come alive,
that shapes were coming warily toward him in an ominous wedgelike formation. His one
conscious action was to bury the small carved stone Buddha he wore around his neck

under leaves in a shallow hurriedly dug grave beneath where he lay. He could hear voices,
and after a while he became aware that the shapes were asking him questions. He
squinted through the fever-sweat to make them out in the emerald twilight, but one of
them covered his eyes with a blindfold. Not that it was needed. When they lifted him off
the bed of leaves and detritus he had made for himself, he passed out. Waking two days
later, he found himself inside a Khmer Rouge encampment. As soon as he was deemed fit
by a cadaverous man with sunken cheeks and one watery eye, the interrogation began.
They had thrown him into a pit with writhing creatures which to this day he could not
identify. He was cast into a darkness more complete, more profound than any he had ever
known before. And it was this darkness, enveloping, constricting, pressing against his
temples like a weight growing in baleful proportion to the hours that passed, that terrified
him the most.
A darkness not unlike this one, in the belly of Rush Service Flight 113.
... Then Jonah prayed unto the Lord his God out of the fish's belly. And said, I cried by
reason of mine affliction unto the Lord, and he heard me; out of the belly of hell cried I,
and thou heardest my voice. For thou hadst cast me into the deep, in the midst of the seas;
and the floods compassed me about: all thy billows and thy waves passed over me . ..
He still remembered that section from the frayed and stained copy of the Bible the
missionary had made him memorize. Horrible! Horrible! Because Khan, in the midst of
the hostile and murderous Khmer Rouge, had been cast quite literally into the belly of
hell, and he had prayed—or what passed for prayer in his still unformed mind—for
deliverance. This was before the Bible had been pushed on him, before he had understood
the teachings of the Buddha, for he had descended into formless chaos at a very early age.
The Lord had heard Jonah cry out from the belly of the whale, but no one had heard Khan.
He had been utterly alone in the darkness and then, when they felt that they had softened
him up sufficiently, they pulled him out and slowly, expertly, with a cold passion it
would take him years to acquire began to bleed him.
Khan snapped on the flashlight he carried with him, sat immobile, staring at Bourne.
Unfolding his legs, he kicked out violently, the sole of his shoe catching Bourne on the
shoulder so that he rolled over on his side facing Khan. Bourne groaned, and his eyes
fluttered open. He gasped, took another shuddering breath, inhaling the fumes from the
aviation fuel, and convulsed, vomiting in the space between where he lay in burning pain
and misery and where Khan sat serene as Buddha himself.
"I've been down to the bottoms of the mountains; the earth with her bars was about me
forever; yet have I brought up my life from the darkness," Khan said, paraphrasing Jonah.
He continued to stare fixedly into Bourne's reddened swollen face. "You look like shit."
Bourne struggled to rise onto one elbow. Khan calmly kicked it out from under him.
Again Bourne tried to sit up and again Khan thwarted him. The third time, however,
Khan did not make a move and Bourne sat up, facing him.
The faint and maddeningly enigmatic smile played across Khan's lips, but there was a
sudden spark of flames in his eyes.
"Hello, Father," he said. "It's been such a long time I was beginning to think we'd never
have this moment."

Bourne shook his head slightly. "What the hell are you talking about?" "I'm your son."
"My son is ten years old."
Khan's eyes were glittery. "Not that one. I'm the one you left behind in Phnom Penh."
All at once, Bourne felt violated. A red rage rose up inside him. "How dare you? I
don't know who you are, but my son Joshua is dead." The effort cost him, for he had
inhaled more of the fumes, and he bent over suddenly, retching again, but there was
nothing left inside him to vomit up.
"I'm not dead." Khan's voice was almost tender as he leaned forward, pulled Bourne
back up to face him. In so doing, the small carved stone Buddha fell away from his
hairless chest, swinging a little with his efforts to keep Bourne upright. "As you can see."
"No, Joshua is dead! I put the coffin in the ground myself, along with Dao and Alyssa!
They were wrapped in American flags."
"Lies, lies and more lies!" Khan held the carved stone Buddha in the palm of his hand,
held it toward Bourne. "Look at this, and remember, Bourne."
Reality seemed to slip away from Bourne. He heard his rapid pulse thundering in his
inner ears, a tidal wave that threatened to pick him up and carry him off. It couldn't be! It
couldn't! "Where—where did you get that?"
"You know what this is, don't you?" The Buddha disappeared behind the curl of his
fingers. "Have you finally recognized your long-lost son Joshua?"
"You're not Joshua!" Bourne was enraged now, his face dark, his lips pulled back from
his teeth in an animal snarl. "Which Southeast Asia diplomat did you kill to get it?" He
laughed grimly. "Yes, I know more about you than you think."
"Then you're sadly mistaken. This is mine, Bourne. Do you understand?" He opened
his hand, revealed the Buddha again, the stone dark with the imprint of his sweat. "The
Buddha is mine!"
"Liar!" Bourne leaped at him, his arms coming around from behind his back. He had
flexed his muscles—the cords expanding as Khan had wound the wire around him—then
using the slack had worked his way out of the bonds while Khan had been gloating.
Khan was caught out, unprepared for his headlong bull-rush. He tumbled backward,
Bourne on top of him. The flashlight struck the deck, rolling back and forth, its potent
beam flashing on them, then off, illuminating an expression here, a bulging muscle there.
In this eerily striped and stippled darkness and light, so like the dense jungle they had left
behind, they fought like beasts, breathing in each other's enmity, struggling for
supremacy.
Bourne, his teeth gritted, struck Khan again and again in a maddened attack. Khan
managed to gain a grip on Bourne's thigh, pressed in on the nerve bundle there. Bourne
lurched, his temporarily paralyzed leg buckling beneath him. Khan struck him hard on
the point of the chin, and Bourne staggered further, shaking his head. He grabbed hold of
his switchblade just as Khan delivered another massive blow. Bourne dropped the knife
and Khan picked it up, flipped open the blade.
He stood over Bourne now, pulled him up by the front of his shirt. A brief tremor
passed through him, as a current sizzles through a wire when the switch is thrown. "I'm
your son. Khan is a name I took, just as David Webb took the name Jason Bourne."

"No!" Bourne fairly shouted this over the rising noise and vibration of the engines.
"My son died with the rest of my family in Phnom Penh!"
"I am Joshua Webb," Khan said. "You abandoned me. You left me to the jungle, to my
death."
The point of the knife hovered over Bourne's throat. "How many times I almost died. I
would have, I'm sure of it, if I didn't have your memory to hold on to."
"How dare you use his name! Joshua is dead!" Bourne's face was livid, his teeth bared
in animal rage. His vision was clouded with blood-lust.
"Maybe he is." The knife-blade lay against Bourne's skin. A millimeter more and it
would draw blood. "I'm Khan now. Joshua—the Joshua you knew—is dead. I've come
back for revenge, to deliver your punishment for abandoning me. I could've killed you so
many times in the last few days, but I stayed my hand because before I killed you I
wanted you to know what you had done to me." Khan's lips opened and a bubble of
spittle grew at the corner of his mouth. "Why did you abandon me? How could you have
run away!"
The plane gave a terrific lurch as it began to taxi out onto the runway. The blade
sprayed blood as it sliced into Bourne's skin, then it was lifted away as Khan lost his
balance. Bourne took the advantage, drove his balled fist into Khan's side. Khan swept
his foot back, hooking it behind Bourne's ankle, and Bourne went down. The plane
slowed, turning onto the head of the runway.
"I didn't run away!" Bourne shouted. "Joshua was taken from me!"
Khan pounced on him, the knife flashing down. Bourne twisted and the blade drove
past his right ear. He was aware of the ceramic gun secreted at his right hip, but try as he
might he wouldn't be able to get to it without leaving himself open to a fatal attack. They
struggled, their muscles bulging, their faces engorged with effort and rage. Their breath
sawed from between half-open mouths, their eyes and minds searching for the most
minute opening as they attacked and defended, counterattacked only to be rebuffed. They
were well matched, if not in age, then in speed, strength, skill and cunning. It was as if
they knew each other's minds, as if they could anticipate each other's moves a split
second beforehand, thus neutralizing whatever advantage had been sought. They did not
fight with dispassion and, therefore, they did not fight at peak level. All their emotion had
been flushed out of the depths, lay stranded and squirming in the conscious mind, like an
oil slick clouding water.
The plane lurched, the fuselage trembling as the plane began its race down the runway.
Bourne slipped and Khan used his free hand as a cudgel to draw Bourne's attention away
from the knife. Bourne countered, striking the inside of Khan's left wrist. But now the
blade-point flashed in on him. He stepped back and to the side, inadvertently unlatching
the bay door. The rising motion of the plane caused the unlocked door to swing open.
As the runway blurred by below, Bourne splayed himself out like a starfish to keep
himself inside the plane, gripping the doorframe tightly with both hands. Grinning
maniacally, Khan leaned in toward Bourne, the knife-blade describing a wicked shallow
arc that would cut across the entire width of Bourne's abdomen.
Khan lunged just as the plane was about to lift off the runway. At the last possible
instant, Bourne let go with his right hand. His body, driven out and back by gravity,

swung so violently away that his shoulder was nearly dislocated. Where his body had
been was now a gaping space through which Khan fell, tumbling to the tarmac below.
Bourne had one final glimpse of him, nothing more than a gray ball against the black of
the runway.
Then the plane was airborne and Bourne was swinging up, farther from the open
doorway. He struggled; rain whipped against him like chain-mail. The wind threatened to
take his breath away, but it scrubbed the last of the jet fuel from his face, the rain rinsing
his stinging red-rimmed eyes, flushing the poison from his skin and tissue. The plane
banked to the right and Khan's flashlight rolled across the cargo bay deck, tumbled out
after him. Bourne knew that if he did not get himself inside within seconds, he would be
lost. The terrible strain on his arm was far too intense for him to hold on much beyond
that.
Swinging his leg around, he managed to hook the back of his left ankle into the
doorway. Then, with a mighty effort, he heaved himself forward, the back of his knee
clamped against the raised frame, giving himself both purchase and leverage enough to
turn so that he was facing the fuselage. He got his right hand on the lip of the seal and in
this fashion was able to work his way into the interior. His last act was to slam the door
shut.
Bourne, bruised, bleeding and in a great deal of pain, collapsed into an exhausted heap.
In the frightful, turbulent darkness of the shuddering interior, he saw again the small
carved stone Buddha that he and his first wife had given Joshua for his fourth birthday.
Dao had wanted the spirit of Buddha to be with their son from the earliest age. Joshua,
who had died along with Dao and his little sister when the enemy plane had strafed the
river they had been playing in.
Joshua was dead. Dao, Alyssa, Joshua—they were all dead, their bodies ripped asunder
by the hail of bullets from the dive-bombing plane. His son could not be alive, he could
not. To think otherwise would be to invite insanity. Then who was Khan really, and why
was he playing this hideously cruel game?
Bourne had no answers. The plane dipped and rose, the pitch of the engines changing
as it reached cruising altitude. It grew frigid, his breath clouding as it left his nose and
mouth. He wrapped his arms around himself, rocking. It was not possible. It was not!
He gave an inarticulate animal cry, and all at once he was undone by pain and utter
despair. His head sank, and he wept bitter tears of rage, disbelief and grief.

PART TWO

CHAPTER ELEVEN

In the full belly of Flight 113, Jason Bourne was asleep, but in his unconscious mind
his life—a far-off life he had buried long ago—was once again unspooling. His dreams
were filled to overflowing with images, feelings, sights and sounds he had spent the
intervening years pushing down as far from his conscious thoughts as they would go.
What had happened that hot summer's day in Phnom Penh? No one knew. At least, no
one who was still alive. This much was fact: While he sat bored and restless in his aircooled office at the American Foreign Services complex, attending a meeting, his wife
Dao had taken their two children swimming in the wide, muddy river just outside their
house. From out of nowhere, an enemy plane had banked, dropping from the sky. It
strafed the river where David Webb's family swam and splashed and played.
How many times had he envisioned the terrible sight? Had Dao seen the plane first?
But it had come upon them so swiftly, swooping down in a silent glide. If so, she must
have gathered their children to her, pushing them beneath the water, covering them with
her own body in a vain attempt to save them even while their screams echoed in her ears,
their blood flecked her face, even while she felt the pain of her own impending death.
This, in any event, was what he believed, what he dreamed, what had driven him to the
edge of madness. For the screams he imagined Dao had heard just before the end were
the same screams he heard night after night, starting awake, his heart racing, his blood
pounding. Those dreams had forced him to abandon his house, all that he had held dear,
for the sight of each familiar object had been like a stab in his guts. He had fled Phnom
Penh for Saigon, where Alexander Conklin had taken charge of him.
If only he could have left his nightmares behind in Phnom Penh. In the dripping
jungles of Vietnam, they came back to him again and again, as if they were wounds he
needed to inflict on himself. Because this truth, above all others, remained: He could not
forgive himself for not being there, for not protecting his wife and children.
He cried out now in his tortured dreams thirty thousand feet over the stormy Atlantic.
Of what use is a husband and a father, he asked himself as he had a thousand times before,
if he failed to protect his family?
The DCI was woken out of a sound sleep at five in the morning by a priority call from
the National Security Advisor, summoning him to her office in one hour. Just when did
this bitch-woman sleep? he wondered as he put down the phone. He sat on the edge of his
bed, facing away from Madeleine. Nothing disturbed her sleep, he thought sourly. Long
ago she had taught herself to sleep through the phone ringing at all hours of the night and
morning.
"Wake up!" he said, shaking Madeleine awake. "There's a flap on and I need coffee."
Without a note of complaint, she rose, slipped on her robe and slippers and went down
the hall to the kitchen.
Rubbing his face, the DCI padded into the bathroom, closed the door. Sitting on the
toilet, he called the DDCI. Why the hell should Lindros be sleeping when his superior
was not? To his consternation, however, Martin Lindros was wide awake.
"I've been spending all night in the Four-Zero archives." Lindros was referring to the
maximum-security files on CIA personnel. "I think I know all there is to know about both
Alex Conklin and Jason Bourne."

"Great. Find me Bourne then."
"Sir, knowing what I know about the two of them, how closely they worked together,
how many times they went out on a limb for each other, saved each other's lives, I find it
highly improbable that Bourne would murder Alex Conklin."
"Alonzo-Ortiz wants to see me," the DCI said irritably. "After that fiasco at
Washington Circle, d'you think I should tell her what you've just told me?"
"Well, no, but—"
"You're goddamned right, sonny boy. I've got to give her facts, facts that add up to
good news."
Lindros cleared his throat. "At the moment, I don't have any. Bourne has vanished."
"Vanished? Jesus Christ, Martin, what the hell kind of intelligence operation are you
running?"
"The man's a magician."
"He's flesh and blood, just like the rest of us," the DCI thundered. "How the hell did he
slip through your fingers yet again? I thought you had all the bases covered!"
"We did. He simply—"
"Vanished, I know. This is what you have for me? Alonzo-Ortiz will have my fucking
head on a platter, but not before I have yours!"
The DCI cut the connection, flung the phone through the open doorway onto the bed.
By the time he had showered, dressed and taken a sip of coffee from the mug Madeleine
obediently held out, his car was waiting for him.
Through the pane of bullet-proof glass, he drank in the facade of his house, dark-red
brick with pale stone quoins at the corners, working shutters at every window. It had once
belonged to a Russian tenor, Maxim something-or-other, but the DCI liked it because it
had about it a certain mathematical elegance, an aristocratic air that could no longer be
found in buildings of a younger vintage. Best of all was its sense of Old World privacy,
owing to a cobbled courtyard screened by leafy poplars and a hand-worked iron fence.
He sat back in the plush seat of the Lincoln Town Car, watching morosely as
Washington slept on around him. Christ, at this hour only the fucking robins are up, he
thought. Aren't I due the privilege of seniority? After all these years of service, don't I
deserve to sleep past five o'clock?
They sped across the Arlington Memorial Bridge, the Potomac gun-metal gray,
looking flat and hard as an airport runway. On the other side, looming over the more or
less Doric temple of the Lincoln Memorial, was the Washington Monument, dark and
forbidding as the spears the Spartans once used to drive through the hearts of their
enemies.
Each time the water closes over him, he hears a musical sound, as of the bells the
monks are sounding, echoing from ridge to ridge in the forested mountains; the monks he
hunted when he was with the Khmer Rouge. And the smell of, what is it? cinnamon. The
water, swirling with a malevolent current, is alive with sounds and scents from he knows
not where. It seeks to drag him down, and once again he's sinking. No matter how hard
he struggles, how desperately he strikes out for the surface, he feels himself spiraling

down, as if weighted with lead. His hands are scrabbling at the thick rope tied around his
left ankle, but it's so slick it keeps sliding through his fingers. What is at the end of the
rope? He peers down into the shadowy depths through which he's sinking. It seems
imperative to him that he know what is dragging him to his death, as if that knowledge
might save him from a horror for which he has no name. He's falling, falling, tumbling
into darkness, unable to understand the nature of his desperate predicament. Below him,
at the end of the taut rope, he sees a shape—the thing that will cause his death. Emotion
sticks in his throat like a mouthful of nettles, and as he tries to define the shape, the
musical sound comes to him again, clearer this time, not bells, something else, something
at once intimate and barely remembered. At last, he identifies the thing that's causing him
to drown: It's a human body. All at once, he begins to weep....
Khan awoke with a start, a whimper caught in his throat. He bit down hard on his lip,
looked around the darkened cabin of the plane. Outside, all was black as pitch. He had
fallen asleep even though he'd promised himself he wouldn't, knowing that if he did he
would be trapped in his recurring nightmare. He rose, went to the lavatory, where he used
the paper towels to wipe the sweat off his face and arms. He felt more tired than when the
flight had taken off. While he was staring at himself in the mirror, the pilot announced
their airtime to Orly Airport: four hours, fifty minutes. An eternity for Khan.
There was a line of people waiting as he exited. He made his way back to his seat.
Jason Bourne had a specific destination in mind; he knew that from the information the
tailor, Fine, had provided: Bourne was now in possession of a packet meant for Alex
Conklin. Was it possible, he wondered, that Bourne would now take on Conklin's identity?
It would be something Khan would consider if he were in Bourne's shoes.
Khan stared out the window at the black sky. Bourne was somewhere in the sprawling
metropolis ahead of him, this much was known, but he had no doubt that Paris was just a
way station. Bourne's final destination was yet to be learned.
The National Security Advisor's assistant cleared her throat discreetly and the DCI
glanced at his watch. Roberta Alonzo-Ortiz, the bitch-woman, had kept him waiting
almost forty minutes. Inside the Beltway, playing games of power was standard operating
procedure, but Jesus Christ, she was a woman. And weren't they both on the National
Security Council? But she was the president's direct appointee; she had his ear like no
one else. Where the hell was Brent Scowcroft when you needed him? Pasting a smile on
his face, he turned away from the window out which he had been gazing while his mind
had been engaged.
"She's ready to see you now," the assistant cooed sweetly. "Her call with the president
just ended."
The bitch-woman doesn't miss a trick, the DCI thought. How she loves to rub my nose
in her power-stink.
The National Security Advisor was entrenched behind her desk, a huge antique affair
she'd had trucked in at her own expense. The DCI thought it absurd, especially since
there was nothing on her desk except the brass pen-set the president had given her upon
her acceptance of the appointment. He didn't trust people with tidy desks. Behind her, on
elaborate gold standards, were the American flag and the flag with the seal of the

President of the United States. Between them was a view of Lafayette Park. Two highbacked upholstered chairs sat facing her. The DCI looked at them somewhat longingly.
Roberta Alonzo-Ortiz looked bright and chipper in a dark-blue knit suit and white silk
blouse. In her ears were gold-backed enamel earrings of the American flag.
"I just got off the phone with the president," she said without preamble, not even a
"Good morning" or "Have a seat."
"So your assistant told me."
Alonzo-Ortiz glared at him, a momentary reminder that she hated being interrupted.
"The conversation concerned you."
Despite his best intentions, the DCI felt his body flush. "Perhaps I should have been
here then."
"That would not have been inappropriate." The National Security Advisor went on
before he could respond to her verbal slap in the face. "The terrorism summit will take
place in five days. Every element is in place, which is why it pains me to have to reiterate
that we are walking on eggshells here. Nothing can disturb the summit, especially not a
CIA assassin gone criminally insane. The president is anticipating that the summit will be
an unqualified success. He expects to make it the cornerstone of his drive for reelection.
Even more, it will be his legacy." She put her hands flat on the highly polished surface of
her desk. "Let me be perfectly clear—I have made the summit my number-one priority.
Its success will ensure that this presidency is lauded and revered for generations to
come."
The DCI had been standing throughout this discourse, not having been invited to sit
down. The verbal dressing-down was especially humiliating, given its subtext. He did not
care for threats, particularly veiled ones. He felt as if he was being given detention in
elementary school.
"I had to brief him about the Washington Circle debacle." She said it as if the DCI had
made her deliver a shovelful of shit to the Oval Office. "There are consequences to
failure; there always are. You need to put a stake through the heart of this one so it can be
buried as soon as possible. Do you understand me?"
"Perfectly."
"Because it won't go away on its own," the National Security Advisor said.
A vein had started to pulse in the DCI's temple. He felt the urge to throw something at
her. "I said I understood perfectly."
Roberta Alonzo-Ortiz scrutinized him for a moment, as if she was deciding whether he
was worthy of being believed. At length, she said, "Where's Jason Bourne?"
"He's fled the country." The DCI's fists were clenched and white. It was beyond him to
tell the bitch-woman that Bourne had simply vanished. As it was, he could scarcely get
the words out. But the moment he saw the look on her face, he realized his error.
"Fled the country?" Alonzo-Ortiz rose. "Where has he gone?"
The DCI remained silent.
"I see. If Bourne gets anywhere near Reykjavik..."
"Why would he do that?"

"I don't know. He's insane, remember? He's gone rogue. He must know that sabotaging
the summit security would embarrass us like nothing else." Her fury was palpable, and
for the first time the DCI was truly afraid of her.
"I want Bourne dead," she said in a voice of steel.
"As much as I do." The DCI was fuming. "He's already killed twice, and one of the
victims was an old friend."
The National Security Advisor came around from behind her desk. "The president
wants Bourne dead. An agent gone rogue—and let's be honest here, Jason Bourne is a
worst-case scenario—is a wild card we can't afford. Do I make myself clear?"
The DCI nodded. "Believe me when I tell you that Bourne is as good as dead, vanished
as if he had never existed at all."
"From your mouth to God's ear. The president's eye is on you," Roberta Alonzo-Ortiz
said, ending the interview as abruptly and unpleasantly as she had begun it.
Jason Bourne arrived in Paris on a wet, overcast morning. Paris, city of light, was not
at its best in the rain. The mansard-roofed buildings looked gray and wan, and the usually
gay and lively outdoor cafes that lined the city's boulevards were quite deserted. Life
went on in its muted fashion, but the city was not the same as when it sparkled and shone
in sunlight, when good conversation and laughter could be heard on almost every corner.
Exhausted both physically and emotionally, Bourne had spent most of the flight on his
side, curled in a ball, asleep. His slumber, though now and again interrupted by dark and
disturbing dreams, had the benefit of providing a well-needed respite from the pain that
had wracked him in the first hour after the plane had taken off. He awoke, chilled and
stiff, thinking of the small carved stone Buddha that had hung around Khan's neck. The
image seemed to mock him, to be grinning, a mystery yet to be solved. He knew there
must be many such carvings—in the shop where he and Dao had chosen the one they
would give Joshua there were more than a dozen! He also knew that many Asian
Buddhists wore such charms, for both protection and good luck.
In his mind's eye, he saw again Khan's knowing expression, so alight with anticipation
and hatred when he had said, "You know what this is, don't you?" And then, uttered with
such vehemence: "This is mine, Bourne. Do you understand? The Buddha is mine!" Khan
was not Joshua Webb, Bourne told himself. Khan was clever but cruel—an assassin who
had killed many times. He could not be Bourne's son.
Despite a bout of heavy crosswinds as they had left the coastline of the United States
behind, Rush Service Flight 113 landed at Charles de Gaulle International Airport more
or less on time. Bourne felt the urge to remove himself from the cargo hold while it was
still on the runway, but he restrained himself.
Another plane was preparing to land. If he got off now, he would be out in the open,
exposed in an area where even airport personnel should not be. And so he waited
patiently while the plane taxied onward.
As it slowed, he knew that now was the time to act. While the plane was still moving,
the jet engines running, none of the ground crew would approach the plane. He opened
the door, jumped out onto the tarmac just as a fuel truck was passing by. He caught a ride
on the back of it. Hanging there, he experienced a violent wave of nausea as the fumes

triggered the memory of Khan's surprise attack. He leaped off the truck as quickly as was
practical, making his way into the terminal building.
Inside, he collided with a baggage handler, apologized profusely in French, with a
hand to his head complaining of a migraine. Around the corner of the corridor, he used
the ID tag he had swiped from the handler to go through the two sets of doors, out into
the terminal proper, which, much to his consternation, was nothing more than a converted
hangar. There were precious few people about, but at least he had successfully bypassed
Customs and Immigration.
At the first opportunity, he dropped the ID tag into the nearest waste bin. He did not
want to be caught wearing it when the handler reported it missing. Standing beneath a
large clock, he adjusted his watch. It was just after six hi the morning, Paris time. He
called Robbinet, described where he was.
The minister seemed puzzled. "Did you come in on a charter flight, Jason?"
"No, cargo plane."
"Bon, that explains why you are in old Terminal Three. You must have been diverted
from Orly," Robbinet said. "Stay right where you are, mon ami. I will collect you
shortly." He chuckled. "In the meantime, welcome to Paris. Confusion and ill-fortune to
your pursuers."
Bourne went to wash up. Staring at himself in the men's room mirror, he saw a haggard
face, haunted eyes and a bloody throat, someone he barely recognized. Cupping his hands,
he threw water over his face and head, sluicing away the sweat, grime and whatever was
left of the makeup he had applied earlier. With a damp paper towel, he cleaned the
darkened horizontal wound across his throat. He knew he would need to get some
antibiotic cream on it as soon as possible.
His stomach was in a knot, and though he didn't feel hungry, he knew he needed to eat.
Every once in a while the taste of the jet fuel came back to him and he gagged, eyes
tearing with the effort. To get his mind off the sick sensation, he performed five minutes
of stretching, five more of calisthenics, ridding his muscles of their cramped and aching
condition. He ignored the pain the exercises cost him, concentrating instead on breathing
deeply and evenly.
By the time he walked back into the terminal, Jacques Robbinet was waiting for him.
He was a tall, extraordinarily fit man, neatly dressed in a dark pinstripe suit, gleaming
brogues and a stylish tweed topcoat. He was a bit older and a bit grayer, but otherwise he
was the figure out of Bourne's fragmented memory.
He spotted Bourne immediately and a grin broke out on his face, but he made no move
toward his old friend. Instead, he used hand signals to indicate that Bourne should walk
down the terminal to Bourne's right. Bourne immediately saw why. Several members of
the Police Nationale had entered the hangar, were questioning airport personnel,
doubtless on the lookout for the suspect who had stolen the baggage handler's ID. Bourne
walked at a natural pace. He was almost at the doors when he saw two more Police
Nationale, machine pistols slung across their chests, carefully watching everyone who
went in and out of the terminal.
Robbinet had seen them as well. Putting a frown on his face, he hurried past Bourne,
pushing through the doors and engaging the policemen's attention. As soon as he

introduced himself, they told him that they were on the lookout for a suspect—an
assumed terrorist—who had stolen a baggage handler's ID tag. They showed him a faxed
copy of Bourne's photo.
No, the minister had not seen this man. Robbinet's face assumed an expression of fear.
Perhaps—was such a thing possible?—the terrorist was after him, he said. Would they be
so kind as to escort him to his car?
As soon as the three men had moved off, Bourne went quickly through the door, out
into the gray mist. He saw the policemen accompanying Robbinet to his Peugeot and he
walked in the opposite direction. As the minister got into his car, he gave Bourne a
furtive glance. He thanked the policemen, who walked back to their post outside the
terminal doors.
Robbinet drove off, made a U-turn, coming back to exit the airport. Out of sight of the
policemen, he slowed the car, rolled down the off-side window.
"That was close, mon ami"
When Bourne made a move to get in, Robbinet shook his head. "With the airport on
high alert, there is certain to be more Police Nationale about." He reached down, popped
the trunk. "Not the most comfortable of places." He looked apologetic. "But for now
surely the safest."
Without another word, Bourne crawled into the trunk, shutting himself in, and
Robbinet took off. It was well the minister had thought ahead; there were two roadblocks
to negotiate before they could exit the airport, the first manned by Police Nationale, the
second by members of the Quai d'Orsay, the French equivalent of the CIA. With
Robbinet's credentials, he got through both without incident, but he was repeatedly
shown Bourne's photo, asked if he had seen the fugitive.
Ten minutes after he had turned onto the Al, Robbinet pulled over into a breakdown
area, popped the trunk. Bourne got out, slid into the passenger's seat, and Robbinet
accelerated onto the motorway, heading north.
"That's him!" The baggage handler pointed to the grainy photo of Jason Bourne.
"That's the man who stole my ID."
"You're certain, monsieur? Please look again, more closely this time." Inspector Alain
Savoy centered the photo in front of the potential witness. They were in a concrete room
inside Terminal Three of Charles de Gaulle Airport, where Savoy had decided to set up
temporary headquarters. It was a mean place, smelling strongly of mildew and
disinfectant. He was always in such places, it seemed to him. There was nothing
permanent in his life.
"Yes, yes," the baggage handler said. "He bumped into me, said he had a migraine. Ten
minutes later, when I went to go through a secure door, I discovered the tag was gone. He
took it."
"We know he did," Inspector Savoy said. "Your presence was electronically reported
in two places while your ID tag was missing. Here." He handed over the tag. He was a
short man and sensitive about it. His face looked as rumpled as his longish dark hair. His
lips seemed permanently pursed, as if even in repose he was assessing innocence or guilt.
"We found it in a trash bin."

"Thank you, Inspector."
"You'll be fined, you know. One day's pay."
"That's an outrage," the baggage handler said. "I'll report this to the union. There may
be a demonstration."
Inspector Savoy sighed. He was used to these threats. Among the union workers, there
were always demonstrations. "Is there anything more you can tell me about the incident?"
When the man shook his head, the inspector dismissed him. He stared down at the faxed
sheet. Besides Jason Bourne's photo, it contained an American contact. Pulling out a triband cell phone, he punched in the number.
"Martin Lindros, Deputy Director of Central Intelligence."
"Monsieur Lindros, this is Inspector Alain Savoy of the Quai d'Orsay. We have found
your fugitive."
"What?"
A slow smile crept over Savoy's unshaven face. The Quai d'Orsay was always sucking
at the CIA teat. There was a great deal of pleasure, not to mention national pride, in
having the situation reversed. "That's right. Jason Bourne arrived at Charles de Gaulle
Airport around six this morning, Paris time." Savoy's heart gladdened at the swift intake
of breath at the other end of the line.
"Do you have him?" Lindros asked. "Is Bourne in custody?"
"Sadly, no."
"What do you mean? Where is he?"
"This is a mystery." There ensued a silence so long and deep that Savoy was obliged at
length to say, "Monsieur Lindros, are you still on the line?"
"Yes, Inspector. I'm just going through my notes." Another silence, briefer this time.
"Alex Conklin had a clandestine contact high up in your government, a man named
Jacques Robbinet—do you know him?"
"Certainement, Monsieur Robbinet is the Minister of Culture. Surely you don't expect
me to believe that a man of his stature is in league with this madman?"
"Of course not," Lindros said. "But Bourne has already murdered Monsieur Conklin. If
he's in Paris now, it stands to reason that he may be after Monsieur Robbinet."
"One moment, hold the line, if you please." Inspector Savoy was certain that he'd heard
or read M. Robbinet's name somewhere today. He gestured to a subordinate, who handed
him a sheaf of files. Savoy leafed rapidly through the interviews made this morning at
Charles de Gaulle by all the various police and security services. Sure enough, there was
Robbinet's name. Hurriedly, he got back on the line. "Monsieur Lindros, it happens that
Monsieur Robbinet was here today."
"At the airport?"
"Yes, and not only that. He was interviewed at the same terminal as the one Bourne
was in. In fact, he seemed alarmed when he was told the name of the fugitive. He asked
the Police Nationale to accompany him back to his automobile."
"This proves my theory." Lindros' voice was slightly breathless with a combination of
excitement and alarm. "Inspector, you've got to find Robbinet, and fast."

"There's no problem," Inspector Savoy said. "I'll simply call the minister's office."
"That's precisely what you won't do," Lindros said. "I want to keep this operation
absolutely secure."
"But surely Bourne can't—"
"Inspector, in the brief course of this investigation I've learned never to utter the phrase
'Bourne can't' because I know that he can. He's an exceedingly clever and dangerous
assassin. Anyone who goes near him is in danger of their life, get me?"
"Pardon, monsieur?"
Lindros tried to slow down his speech. "However you choose to find Robbinet, you'll
do it through back channels only. If you surprise the minister, chances are you'll be
surprising Bourne as well."
"D'accord." Savoy stood up and looked for his trench coat.
"Listen closely, Inspector. I'm very much afraid Monsieur Robbinet's life is in
imminent danger," Lindros said. "Everything now depends on you."
Concrete high-rises, office buildings, gleaming factories flashed by, squat and blocky
by American standards, made even more ugly by the gloomy overcast. Soon enough,
Robbinet turned off, driving west on the CD47 into the oncoming downpour.
"Where are we going, Jacques?" Bourne asked. "I need to get to Budapest as quickly as
possible."
"D'accord" Robbinet said. He'd been periodically glancing in his rear-view mirror,
checking for Police Nationale vehicles. The Quai d'Orsay was another matter; their
operatives used unmarked cars, switching make and models among their divisions every
few months. "I had booked you on an outboard flight that left five minutes ago, but while
you were in the air the game board has changed. The Agency is howling for your blood—
and that howl is being heard in all corners of the world where they have leverage,
including mine."
"But there must be a way—"
"Of course there's a way, mon amir Robbinet smiled. "There's always a way—a certain
someone named Jason Bourne taught me that." He turned north again, onto the N17.
"While you rested in the boot of my car, I was far from idle. There's a military transport
leaving from Orly at sixteen hundred hours."
"That's not until four this afternoon," Bourne said. "What about driving to Budapest?"
"Such a plan is unsafe, too many Police Nationale. And your maddened American
friends have pricked the Quai d'Orsay into action." The Frenchman shrugged. "It's all
arranged. I've all your credentials with me. Under military cover you'll be secure from
scrutiny, and in any event it's best to let the incident at Terminal Three die down, norX"
He swung past some slow-moving traffic. "Until then, you'll need a place to go to
ground."
Bourne turned his head away, stared out at the dreary industrial landscape. The impact
of what had happened during his last encounter with Khan had hit him with the impact of
a train derailing. He couldn't help exploring the fierce ache inside himself, much as one
keeps pressing a sore tooth, if only to determine just how deep the pain went. The fiercely

analytical portion of his mind had already determined that Khan hadn't really said
anything that indicated he possessed intimate knowledge of David or Joshua Webb. He
had made intimations, innuendoes, yes, but what did they amount to?
Bourne, aware that Robbinet was scrutinizing him, turned further toward the window.
Robbinet, misconstruing the reason for Bourne's brooding silence, said, "Mon ami, you
will be in Budapest by eighteen hundred hours, have no fear."
"Merci, Jacques." Bourne momentarily freed himself from his melancholy thoughts.
"Thanks for all your kindness and help. What now?"
"Alors, we are going to Goussainville. Not the most scenic town in France, but there's
someone there who I suspect will interest you."
Robbinet said nothing more for the remainder of the trip. He was right about
Goussainville. It was one of those French villages that, because of its proximity to the
airport, had been transformed into a modern industrial town. The depressing rows of
high-rises, glass-fronted offices and giant retailers not unlike Wal-Mart were only slightly
alleviated by the roundabouts and curbsides planted with row upon row of colorful
flowers.
Bourne noticed the radio unit mounted below the dashboard, presumably used by
Jacques' driver. As Robbinet pulled into a gas station, he asked his friend for the
frequencies used by the Police Nationale and the Quai d'Orsay. While Robbinet pumped
gas into the car, Bourne monitored both frequencies but heard nothing about the incident
at the airport, nothing of interest about him. Bourne watched the cars coming and going
in and out of the gas station. A woman got out of her car, asked Robbinet his opinion
about her front driver's side tire. She was worried it needed air. A vehicle with two young
men pulled in. They both got out. One man lounged against the fender of the car while
the driver went into the station. The lounging man eyed Jacques' Peugeot, then gazed
appreciatively at the woman as she walked back to her car.
"Anything on the air?" Robbinet inquired as he slid in beside Bourne.
"Not a thing."
"That at least is good news," Robbinet said as they drove off.
They went down more ugly streets, and Bourne used the mirrors to check that the car
with the two young men wasn't tailing them.
"Goussainville had an ancient and royal beginning," Robbinet said. "Once upon a time
it belonged to Clotaire, wife of Clovis, the king of France early in the sixth century.
While we Franks were still considered barbarians, he converted to Catholicism, making
us acceptable to the Romans. The emperor made him a consul. Barbarians no longer, we
became true champions of the Faith."
"You'd never know this place was once a medieval city."
The minister pulled up to a series of concrete apartment buildings. "In France," he said,
"history is often hidden in the most unexpected places."
Bourne looked around. "This isn't where your current mistress lives, is it?" he said.
"Because the last time you introduced me to your mistress I had to pretend she was my
girlfriend when your wife walked into the cafe" where we were having drinks."

"I recall you having quite a good time that afternoon." Robbinet shook his head. "But
no, with her Dior this and her Yves Saint Laurent that I'm certain Delphine would rather
slit her wrists than live in Goussainville."
"Then what are we doing here?"
The minister sat staring out at the rain for some time. "Filthy weather," he said at last.
"Jacques ... ?"
Robbinet looked around. "Ah, yes, forgive me, mon ami. My mind wanders. Alors, I
am taking you to meet Mylene Dutronc." He cocked his head. "Have you heard her
name?" When Bourne shook his head, Robbinet continued. "I thought not. Well, now that
he's dead, I suppose I can say it. Mile. Dutronc was Alex Conklin's lover."
At once, Bourne said, "Let me guess: light eyes, long wavy hair and a smile with
something of the ironic about it."
"He did tell you about her!"
"No, I saw a photo. It's pretty much all he had of a personal nature in his bedroom." He
waited a moment. "Does she know?"
"I phoned her as soon as I found out."
Bourne wondered why Robbinet hadn't told her in person. It would have been the
decent thing to do.
"Enough talk." Robbinet grabbed an overnight bag from the footwell of the backseat.
"We'll go see Mylene now."
Exiting the Peugeot, they went through the rain, along a little flower-flanked walk, and
mounted a short flight of poured-concrete stairs. Robbinet pressed the button for 4A and
a moment later the buzzer sounded.
The apartment building was as plain and unlovely on the inside as it was on the outside.
They walked up the five flights of stairs to the fourth floor and went along a hallway, past
rows of identical doors on either side. At the sound of their approach, the door opened.
Just inside stood Mylene Dutronc.
She was perhaps a decade older than the image in the photo—in fact, she must have
been sixty by now, Bourne thought, though she appeared at least ten years younger—but
her light eyes had the same sparkle and her smile had the same enigmatic twist to it. She
wore jeans and a man-tailored shirt, an outfit that made her appear feminine because it
showed off her full figure. She was in low heels and her hair, a natural-looking ash-blond,
was tied back from her face.
"Bonjour, Jacques." She lifted her face for Robbinet to kiss on both cheeks, but she
was already looking at his companion.
Bourne could see details that the snapshot hadn't revealed. The color of her eyes, the
sculpted flare of her nostrils, the whiteness of her even teeth. Her face was both powerful
and compassionate.
"And you must be Jason Bourne." Her gray eyes appraised him coolly.
"I'm sorry about Alex," Bourne said.
"You're kind. It's been a shock to all of us who knew him." She stepped back. "Please
come in."

As she shut the door behind her, Bourne took in the room. Mile. Dutronc lived in the
middle of a blocky urban landscape, but her apartment was altogether different. Unlike
many people her age, she had not continued to surround herself with furniture decades
old, relics of the past. Instead, her furnishings were both stylishly modern and
comfortable. A scattering of chairs, a matching pair of sofas facing each other on either
side of a brick fireplace, patterned curtains. It was a place you would not easily want to
leave, Bourne decided.
"I understand you've had a long flight," she said to Bourne. "You must be starving."
She made no mention of his disheveled appearance, for which he was grateful. She seated
him in the dining room, served him food and drink from a typical European kitchen,
small and dark. When she was finished, she sat down opposite him, put her clasped hands
on the table.
Bourne could see now that she had been crying.
"Did he die instantly?" Mile. Dutronc asked. "You see, I've been wondering whether
he suffered."
"No," Bourne said truthfully. "I very much doubt he did."
"That's something, at least." A look of profound relief came over her face. Mile.
Dutronc sat back and, with this movement, Bourne became aware that she had been
holding her body tensely. "Thank you, Jason." She looked up, her expressive gray eyes
locked on his, and he could see all the emotion in her face. "May I call you Jason?"
"Of course," he said.
"You knew Alex well, didn't you?"
"As well as one could ever know Alex Conklin."
For just an instant, her gaze flicked in Robbinet's direction, but it was enough.
"I have some calls to make." The minister had already pulled out his cell phone. "You
won't mind if I leave you two for a little while."
She looked bleakly after Robbinet as he headed for the living room. Then she turned
back to Bourne. "Jason, what you told me just now was said as a true friend. Even if Alex
had never spoken to me about you, I would say the same thing."
"Alex talked to you about me?" Bourne shook his head. "Alex never told civilians
about his work."
There was that smile again; this time the irony in it was quite apparent. "But I'm not, as
you say, a civilian." There was a pack of cigarettes in her hand. "Do you mind if I
smoke?"
"Not at all."
"Many Americans do. It's something of an obsession with you, isn't it?"
She had not been seeking an answer and Bourne did not give her one. He watched as
she lit up, drew the smoke deep into her lungs, let it out slowly, luxuriously. "No, I'm
definitely not a civilian." The smoke swirled around her. "I'm Quai d'Orsay."
Bourne sat very still. Beneath the table, his hand grasped the butt of the ceramic pistol
Deron had given him.
As if reading his mind, Mile. Dutronc shook her head. "Calm yourself, Jason. Jacques
hasn't led you into a trap. You're among friends here."

"I don't understand," he said thickly. "If you're Quai d'Orsay, Alex would've been
doubly sure not to involve you in anything he was working on, so as not to compromise
your loyalties."
"True enough. And this was how it remained for many years." Mile. Dutronc took in
more smoke, let it drift out of her flared nostrils. She had a habit of raising her head
slightly as she exhaled. It made her look like Mar-lene Dietrich. "Then, very recently,
something happened. I don't know what, he wouldn't tell me, though I begged him to."
She regarded him through the smoke haze for some moments. Any member of an
intelligence organization had to maintain a stone facade that revealed nothing of their
inner thoughts or feelings. But through her eyes he could see her mind working, and he
knew that she had let her guard down.
"Tell me, Jason, as a long-time friend of Alex's, do you ever remember him being
frightened?"
"No," Bourne said. "Alex was utterly fearless."
"Well, that day he was frightened. That's why I begged him to tell me what it was, so I
could help, or at least convince him to move himself out of harm's way."
Bourne leaned forward, his body now as tense as Mile. Dutronc's had been before.
"When was this?"
"Two weeks ago."
"Did he tell you anything at all?"
"There was a name he mentioned, Felix Schiffer."
Bourne's pulse began to race. "Dr. Schiffer worked for DARPA."
She frowned. "Alex told me that he worked for the Tactical Non-Lethal Weapons
Directorate."
"That's an Agency adjunct," Bourne said, half to himself. Now the pieces were starting
to fall together. Could Alex have convinced Felix Schiffer to leave DARPA for the
Directorate? Surely, it would not have been difficult for Conklin to make Schiffer
"disappear." But why would he want to? If he was merely poaching on DOD territory, he
could've handled the resulting flak. There had to be another reason Alex needed to get
Felix Schiffer to ground.
He looked at Mylene. "Was Dr. Schiffer the reason Alex was frightened?"
"He wouldn't say, Jason. But how could it be otherwise? That day, Alex made and
received many calls in a very short period of time. He was terribly tense and I knew he
was at the crisis point of a hot field operation. I heard Dr. Schiffer's name mentioned
several times. I suspect that he was the subject of the operation."
Inspector Savoy sat in his Citroen, listening to the scraping sound of his windshield
wipers. He hated the rain. It had been raining the day his wife had left him, the day his
daughter had gone off to school in America, never to return. His wife was living in
Boston now, married to a straight-laced investment banker. She had three children, a
house, property, all that she could wish for, while here he was sitting in this shitty town—
what was its name? ah, yes, Goussainville—biting his nails down to the quick. And, to
top it off, it was raining again.

But today was different because he was closing in on the CIA's most wanted target.
Once he got Jason Bourne, his career would skyrocket. Perhaps he'd come to the attention
of the president himself. He glanced over at the car across the street—Minister Jacques
Robbinet's Peugeot.
From the Quai d'Orsay files, he had retrieved the make, model and license plate of the
minister's car. His fellow officers had informed him that upon exiting the airport
checkpoint the minister had headed north onto the Al. After having ascertained from
headquarters who had been assigned to the northerly section of the dragnet, he had
methodically called each car—mindful of Lindros' warning, keeping away from radio
transmission, whose frequency wasn't secure. None of his contacts had seen the minister's
car, and he was working himself up into a fit of despair when he had gotten to Justine
Berard, who told him that, yes, she had seen Robbinet's car—had spoken to him briefly—
at a gas station. She remembered because the minister seemed tense, nervous, even a bit
rude.
"Did his behavior strike you as odd?"
"Yes, it did. Though I didn't make much of it at the time," Berard had said. "Though
now, of course, my thinking has changed."
"Was the minister alone?" Inspector Savoy asked.
"I'm not certain. It was raining hard and the window was up," Berard said. "To be
candid, my attention was on Monsieur Robbinet."
"Yes, a handsome specimen," Savoy said, more dryly than he had intended. Berard had
been a great help. She had seen the direction in which the minister's car had gone, and by
the time he had arrived in Goussainville, she had found it sitting outside a block of
concrete apartment buildings.
Mile. Dutronc's eyes strayed to Bourne's throat and she stubbed out her cigarette.
"Your wound has begun bleeding again. Come. We must take care of it."
She led him into her bathroom, tiled in sea-green and cream. A small window
overlooking the street let in the dismal light of day. She sat him down and began to wash
the wound with soap and water.
"The bleeding has subsided," she said as she applied antibiotic to the reddened flesh
across his throat. "This wound wasn't accidental. You were in a fight."
"It was difficult getting out of the States."
"You're as tight-lipped as Alex." She stood a little back, as if she needed to get him in
better focus. "You are sad, Jason. So very sad."
"Mile. Dutronc—"
"You must call me Mylene. I insist." She had fashioned an expert bandage from sterile
gauze and surgical tape and now applied it to his wound. "And you must change the
dressing at least every three days, yes?"
"Yes." He responded to her smile. "Merd, Mylene."
She put a hand gently against his cheek. "So very sad. I know how close you and Alex
were. He thought of you as a son."
"He said that?"

"He didn't have to; he had a special look on his face when he spoke about you." She
examined the dressing one last time. "So I know I'm not the only one hurting."
Bourne felt the urge, then, to tell her everything, that it wasn't just the deaths of Alex
and Mo affecting him, but the encounter with Khan. In the end, however, he remained
silent. She had her own grief to bear.
Instead, he said, "What's the deal with you and Jacques? You act as if you hate each
other."
Mylene looked away for a moment, toward the small window with its pebbled glass,
running now with rain. "It was brave of him to bring you here. It must have cost him
much to ask for my help." She turned back, her gray eyes brimming. Alex's death had
brought so much emotion to the surface, and at once he intuited that her own past was
being churned up by the restless ocean of present events. "So much sorrow in this world,
Jason." A single tear rolled from her eye, lay quivering on her cheek, before sliding down.
"Before Alex, you see, there was Jacques."
"You were his mistress?"
She shook her head. "Jacques was not yet married. We were both very young. We
made love like crazy, and because we were both young—and foolish—I became
pregnant."
"You have a child?"
Mylene wiped her eyes. "Non, I wouldn't have it. I didn't love Jacques. It took what
happened to make me see that. Jacques did love me, and he— well, he's so very
Catholic."
She laughed, a little sadly, and Bourne recalled the story Jacques had told him of
Goussainville's history and how the barbarian Franks had been won over by the church.
King Clovis' conversion to Catholicism had been a shrewd decision, but it had been more
a matter of survival and politics than of faith.
"Jacques has never forgiven me." There was no self-pity in her, making her confession
all the more affecting.
He leaned in and tenderly kissed her on both cheeks, and with a small sob she drew
him briefly to her.
She left him to shower, and when he was finished, he found a French military uniform
piled neatly on the toilet seat. As he dressed, he peered out the window. A linden's
branches swung back and forth in the wind. Below him, a handsome woman in her early
forties got out of her car, walked down the street to a Citroen in which a man of
indeterminate age sat behind the wheel, gnawing obsessively at his fingernails. Opening
the passenger's-side door, she slid in.
There was nothing particularly unusual about the scene, except for the fact that Bourne
had seen the same woman at the gas station. She had spoken to Jacques about the air
pressure in her tire.
Quai d'Orsay!
Quickly, he went back into the living room, where Jacques was still on the phone. The
moment the minister saw Bourne's expression, he got off his call.
"What is it, mon amir "We've been made," Bourne said.

"What? How is that possible?"
"I don't know, but there are two Quai d'Orsay agents across the street in a black
Citroen.
Mylene walked in from the kitchen. "Two more are watching the street behind. But
don't worry, they cannot even know which building you're in."
At that moment, the doorbell rang. Bourne drew his gun but Mylene's eyes flashed
their warning. She jerked her head and Bourne and Robbinet moved out of sight. She
opened the door, saw a very rumpled inspector in front of her.
"Alain, bonjour" she said.
Tm sorry to intrude on your vacation," Inspector Savoy said, a sheepish grin on his
face, "but I was sitting outside and all of a sudden I remembered that you lived here."
"Would you like to come in, have a cup of coffee?"
"Thank you, no. I can't spare the time."
Greatly relieved, Mylene said, "And what were you doing sitting outside my house?"
"We're looking for Jacques Robbinet."
Her eyes opened wide. "The Minister of Culture? But why would he be in, of all places,
Goussainville?"
"Your guess is as good as mine," Inspector Savoy said. "Nevertheless, his car is parked
across the street."
"The inspector is too clever for us, Mylene." Jacques Robbinet strode into the living
room buttoning his white shirt. "He has found out about us."
With her back turned to Savoy, Mylene shot Robbinet a look. He returned it, smiling
easily.
His lips brushed hers, as he came up beside her.
By this time Inspector Savoy's cheeks had grown warm. "Minister Robbinet, I had no
idea ... that is, there was no intention to intrude—"
Robbinet raised a hand. "Apology accepted, but why are you looking for me?"
With an overt show of relief, Savoy handed over the grainy photo of Jason Bourne.
"We're searching for this man, Minister. A known CIA assassin who's turned rogue. We
have reason to believe that he means to kill you."
"But that's terrible, Alain!"
To Bourne, observing this charade from the shadows, Mylene looked shocked indeed.
"I don't know this man," Robbinet said, "nor why he would want to take my life. But
then who can fathom the minds of assassins, eh?" He shrugged, turned as Mylene handed
him his jacket and raincoat. "But by all means, I'll return to Paris as quickly as possible."
"With us as an escort," Savoy said firmly. "You'll ride with me and my associate will
drive your official car." He held out his hand. "If you would be so kind."
"As you wish." Robbinet delivered the key to his Peugeot. "I'm in your hands,
Inspector."
Then, he turned, took Mylene in his arms. Savoy discreetly withdrew, saying he would
wait in the hallway for Robbinet.

"Take Jason down to the car park," Robbinet whispered in her ear. "Take my attache
case with you and give him the contents just before you leave him." He whispered the
combination to her and she nodded.
She stared up at him, then she kissed him hard on the mouth and said, "Godspeed,
Jacques."
For just an instant, his eyes opened wide in response. Then he was gone, and Mylene
went quickly through the living room.
She called softly to Bourne, and he appeared. "We must make the most of the
advantage Jacques has given you."
Bourne nodded. "D'accord."
Mylene grabbed Robbinet's attach^ case. "Come now. We must hurry!"
She opened the front door, peered out to ensure that the way was clear, then led him
down to the underground car park. She stopped just inside the metal-clad door. Peering
through the wire-reinforced glass pane, she reported back to him. "The car park looks
clear, but be vigilant, you never know."
She unlocked the attache case, held out a packet. "Here is the money you requested,
along with your identity card and your orders. You're Pierre Montefort, a courier due to
hand over top-secret documents to the military attache in Budapest not later than eighteen
hundred hours, local time." She dropped a set of keys into Bourne's palm. "A military
motorcycle is parked in the third rank, next-to-last space on the right."
For a moment, Bourne and Mylene stood looking at each other. He opened his mouth,
but she spoke first, "Remember, Jason, life is too short for regrets."
Bourne left then, striding with ramrod-straight back through the door into a grim and
gloomy place of naked concrete block and oil-stained macadam. He looked neither to the
left nor right as he went down the car ranks. At the third one, he turned right. A moment
later, he found the motorcycle, a silver Voxan VB-1, with a huge 996-cubic V2 engine.
Bourne strapped his attache case to the back, where it would be prominently displayed
for the Quai d'Orsay to see. He found a helmet in the carry pack, stowed his hat.
Climbing on, he walked the machine out of its parking spot, started the engine and
wheeled out of the car park into the rain.
Justine B£rard had been thinking about her son, Yves, when she received the call from
Inspector Savoy. These days it seemed as if the only way she could relate to Yves was
through his video games. The first time she had beaten him in Grand Theft Auto by
outmaneuvering his car with hers was the moment he had looked at her—and really seen
her as a living, breathing human being, rather than the annoyance that cooked him food
and washed his clothes. Ever since then, though, he'd been begging her to take him for a
spin in her official car. So far, she had been successful in staving him off, but there was
no doubt that he was wearing her down, not only because she was proud of her nerveless
driving but because she desperately wanted Yves to be proud of her.
Following the call from Savoy, informing her that he had found Minister Robbinet and
that they were escorting him back to Paris, she had immediately gotten things rolling,
pulling the men off surveillance duty, directing them into standard VIP protection
formation. Now she gestured to the Police Nationale standing by as Inspector Savoy

escorted the Minister of Culture out the front door of the apartment building. At the same
time, she checked the street for any sign of the insane assassin Jason Bourne.
Be"rard was elated. It made no difference whether Inspector Savoy had found the
minister in this maze of residences through cleverness or good fortune, she would benefit
hugely, for it was she who had led Savoy here and it was she who would be in at the end
when they brought Jacques Robbinet back to Paris safe and sound.
Savoy and Robbinet had crossed the street under the watchful eyes of the phalanx of
policemen, machine pistols at the ready. She had Savoy's car door open, and as he passed
her, he handed her the key to the minister's Peugeot.
As Robbinet ducked his head to get into the backseat of Savoy's car, Berard heard the
throaty roar of a powerful motorcycle engine. By the echo, it was coming from the car
park below the building in which Savoy had found Minister Robbinet. She cocked her
head, recognizing the roar of a Voxan VB-1. A military vehicle.
A moment later, she saw the courier accelerate out of the car park and she grabbed her
cell phone. What was a military courier doing in Gous-sainville? Unconsciously, she was
walking toward the minister's Peugeot. She barked out her Quai d'Orsay authorization
code, asked to be patched through to Military Liaison. She had reached the Peugeot,
unlocked it, slid behind the wheel. With the Code Rouge alert on, it did not take her long
to receive the information she was seeking. There was currently no known military
courier anywhere near Goussainville.
She started the car, jerked it into gear. Inspector Savoy's shout of query was drowned
in the screech of the Peugeot's tires as she stood on the gas pedal, accelerating down the
street in pursuit of the Voxan. She could only surmise that Bourne had been on to them,
knew that he was trapped here unless he could make a quick escape.
The urgent CIA circular she had read had noted that he was able to change identity and
appearance with astonishing rapidity. If he was the courier—and, really, when she
thought about it, what other possibility was there?—then apprehending or killing him
would provide her career an entirely new trajectory. She could imagine the minister
himself—so grateful for saving his life—interceding on her behalf, even, possibly,
offering her the position of chief of his security.
In the meantime, though, she would have to bring down this faux courier. Lucky for
her, the minister's car was far from a standard Peugeot sedan. Already she could feel the
souped-up engine responding to the pressure she was putting on it as she slewed hard left
around a corner, shot through a traffic light, passed a lumbering truck on the wrong side.
She ignored the indignant blare of its air horn. All of her being was concentrated on
keeping the Voxan in sight.
At first Bourne couldn't believe that he'd been made so quickly, but as the Peugeot
continued its dogged pursuit, he was forced to conclude that something had gone terribly
wrong. He had seen the Quai d'Orsay taking Robbinet, knew one of their operatives was
driving his car. His assumed identity wouldn't be enough to protect him now; he had to
lose this tail permanently. He hunched over, weaving in and out of traffic, varying his
speeds, the ways in which he overtook slower traffic. He took turns at dangerously acute
angles, aware that at any instant he could go over and send the Voxan screaming onto its
side. A glance in the side mirror confirmed that he was unable to shake the Peugeot.
More ominously, it appeared to be gaining on him.

Though the Voxan wove in and out of traffic, though her car was less ma-neuverable,
Berard kept closing the distance between them. She had flipped the special lever installed
in all ministerial cars that made the head-and taillights flash, and this signal caused the
more alert motorists to give way. In her head scrolled the increasingly more intricate and
hair-raising scenarios of Grand Theft Auto. The scrolling of the streets, the vehicles she
needed to pass or get around were astonishingly similar. Once, in order not to lose the
Voxan, she had to make a split-second decision, running up onto the sidewalk.
Pedestrians scattered from her path.
All at once, she saw the entrance to the Al and knew this was where Bourne must be
headed. Her best chance of getting him was before he made it onto the motorway. Biting
her lip in grim intent, she drew on every last bit of power the Peugeot's engine could give
her, closing the gap even more. The Voxan was only two cars away from her. She pulled
out to the right, overtook one car, waved the other one back, its driver cowed as much by
her aggressive driving as by the Peugeot's flashing lights.
Berard was not one to waste an opportunity. They were coming up on the entrance; it
was now or never. She manhandled the Peugeot up onto the sidewalk, aiming to approach
Bourne on the offside so that in order to keep her in sight he would have to take his eyes
off the road. At the speed they were both going, she knew he couldn't afford to do that.
She rolled down her window, floored the accelerator and the car leaped forward into the
wind-driven rain.
"Pull over!" she cried. "I am Quai d'Orsay! Pull over or risk the consequences!"
The courier ignored her. Drawing her sidearm, she aimed it at his head. Her arm was
straight, elbow locked. Tracking him with the gun's sight, she aimed at the leading edge
of his silhouette. She squeezed the trigger.
But just as she did so, the Voxan swerved hard to their left, slipped in front of an
oncoming car in the next lane, jumped the narrow concrete divider, shot through the
oncoming traffic.
"My God!" Berard breathed. "He's headed onto the off-ramp!"
Even as she slewed the Peugeot around, she saw the Voxan threading its way between
the traffic exiting the Al. Tires screeched, horns blared, terrified drivers shook their fists
and cursed. Berard noted these reactions with only part of her mind. The other part was
engaged in driving through the stalled traffic, up over the median, across the street and
onto the off-ramp herself.
She made it as far as the top of the ramp before she ran into a virtual wall of vehicles.
She raced out into the rain, saw the Voxan accelerating between lanes of the oncoming
traffic. Bourne's driving was astounding, but how long could he continue such perilous
acrobatics?
The Voxan disappeared behind the silver oval cylinder of a tanker truck. Berard sucked
in her breath as she saw the huge eighteen-wheeler come barreling along in the adjacent
lane. She heard the harsh sound of air brakes, then the Voxan struck the semi's massive
radiator grille head-on, instantly erupting in a howling ball of oily flame.

CHAPTER TWELVE
Jason Bourne saw what he liked to call the convergence of opportunity set up right in
front of him. He was running between two lanes of oncoming traffic. To his right was a
tanker truck; to his left, a bit farther ahead, was a massive eighteen-wheeler. The choice
was instinctual, there was no time for second thoughts. He committed his mind and his
body to the convergence. He lifted his legs and, for an instant, he was balanced on the
Voxan's seat with only his left hand for support. He aimed the Voxan at the eighteenwheeler barreling toward him on the left, then let go of the handlebar. Reaching out with
his right hand, his fingers grasped hold of a rung of the skeletal metal ladder that rose up
the tanker truck's curved side and he was jerked off the bike. Then his grip slipped on the
rain-slick metal, and he was on the verge of being swept away like a twig in the wind.
Tears welled up in his eyes at the pain that ripped through the same shoulder he'd strained
outside the cargo hold of the plane. Both hands on the rung, he tightened his grip. As he
swung fully onto the ladder, pressing himself against the tanker, the Voxan slammed into
the eighteen-wheeler's radiator. The tanker truck shuddered, rocking on its shocks as it
hurtled through the ball of flame. Then it was past, rolling its way south toward Orly
Airport and Bourne's freedom.
There were many reasons for Martin Lindros' swift and unerring rise up the Agency's
slippery slope to become DDCI at the age of thirty-eight. He was smart, he came from the
right schools, and he had the ability to keep his head even in a crisis. Moreover, his neareidetic memory gave him a singular edge in keeping the administrative side of the CIA
running smoothly. All important assets, no doubt—mandatory, in fact, for any successful
DDCI. However, the DCI had chosen Lindros for an even more crucial reason: He was
fatherless.
The DCI had known Martin Lindros' father well. For three years they had served
together in Russia and Eastern Europe—until the elder Lindros had been killed in a car
bomb attack. Martin Lindros had been twenty at the time and the effect on him had been
incalculable. It was at the elder Lindros' funeral, while watching the young man's pale
and pinched face, that the DCI knew he wanted to draw Martin Lindros into the same
web that had so fascinated his father.
Approaching him had been easy; he'd been in a vulnerable place. The DCI had been
primed to act, because his unerring instinct had recognized Martin Lindros' desire for
revenge. The DCI had seen that the young man went to Georgetown upon his graduation
from Yale. This served two purposes: It physically brought Martin into his orbit, and it
ensured he would take the requisite courses for the career path the DCI had chosen for
him. The DCI himself had inducted the young man into the Agency, had overseen every
phase of his training. And because he wanted to bind the young man to him for all time,
he at last provided the revenge Martin so desperately sought— the name and address of
the terrorist responsible for constructing the car bomb.
Martin Lindros had followed the DCI's instructions to the letter, showing a
commendably steady hand when he had put a bullet between the terrorist's eyes. Had he
actually been the one who had made the car bomb? Even the DCI couldn't be certain. But

what difference did it make? He was a terrorist and in his day had made many car bombs.
Now he was dead— one more terrorist disposed of—and Martin Lindros could sleep easy
at night, knowing that he had avenged his father's murder.
"You see how Bourne fucked us," Lindros was saying now. "He was the one who
called D.C. Metro as soon as he saw your cruisers. He knew you had no official
jurisdiction in the district, unless you were working with the Agency."
"Sadly, you've got that fucking-A right." Detective Harris of the Virginia State Police
nodded as he downed his sour mash whiskey. "But now that the Frogs have him in their
sights, maybe they'll have better luck running him to ground than we did."
"They're Frogs," Lindros said morosely.
"Even so, they've gotta be able to do something right sometime, no?"
Lindros and Harris were sitting in the Froggy Bottom Lounge on Pennsylvania Avenue.
At this hour, the bar was rilled students from George Washington University. For more
than an hour Lindros had been watching bare midriffs pierced by navel rings and pert
buttocks almost tucked into short skirts nearly twenty years younger than he was. There
came a time in a man's life, he thought, when he began looking in the rearview mirror and
realizing that he was no longer young. None of these girls would give him a second look;
they didn't even know he existed.
"Why is it," he said, "that a man can't stay young all his life?"
Harris laughed and called for more drinks.
"You think it's funny?"
They had passed beyond screaming at each other, beyond frosty silence, beyond snide
and cutting remarks. In the end, they had said to hell with it and had decided to get drunk.
"Yeah, I think it's damn funny," Harris said, making room for the new drinks. "Here
you are mooning over pussy, thinkin' life's passed you by. This isn't about pussy, Martin,
though to tell you the truth, I never did pass up the opportunity to get laid."
"Okay, smart guy, what is it about?"
"We lost, that's all. We got into Jason Bourne's game and he beat us six ways from
Sunday. Not that he didn't have good reason to."
Lindros sat up a little straighter, paid for the precipitate movement with a brief bout of
vertigo. He put a hand to the side of his head. 'What the hell does that mean?"
Harris had a habit of swigging his whiskey around as if it was mouth-wash. His throat
clicked when he swallowed. "I don't think Bourne murdered Conklin and Panov."
Lindros groaned. "Jesus, Harry, not that again."
"I'll say it till I'm blue in the face. What I want to know is why you don't wanna hear
it."
Lindros picked up his head. "Okay, okay. Tell me why you think Bourne is innocent."
"What's the point?"
"I'm asking you, aren't I?"
Harris seemed to consider. He shrugged, pulled out his wallet, extracted a slip of paper,
which he unfolded on the table. "Because of this parking ticket."

Lindros picked the slip up, read it. "This ticket is made out to a Dr. Felix Schiffer." He
shook his head in confusion.
"Felix Schiffer's a scofflaw," Harris said. "I wouldn't've known anything about him,
but we're cracking down on scofflaws this month and one of my men couldn't get to first
base with tracking him down." He tapped the ticket. "It took some doing, but I found out
why my guy couldn't find him. Turns out that all of Schiffer's mail is being sent to Alex
Conklin."
Lindros shook his head. "So?"
"So when I tried to run a database check on this Dr. Felix Schiffer, I ran up against a
wall."
Lindros felt his head starting to clear. "What kind of a wall?"
"One put up by the United States Government." Harris finished off his whiskey in a
single toss, swish and swallow. "This Dr. Schiffer's been put on ice with a capital 1.1
don't know what the hell Conklin was into, but it was hidden so deep I'll bet even his own
people didn't know nothin' about it." He shook his head. "He wasn't killed by a rogue
agent, Martin; on that I'll stake my life."
As Stepan Spalko rode up the private elevator at Humanistas, Ltd., he was in as near to
good spirits as he could get. Except for the unexpected development with Khan,
everything was now back on track. The Chechens were his; they were intelligent, fearless
and willing to die for their cause. As for Arsenov, he was, if nothing else, a dedicated and
disciplined leader. This was why Spalko had chosen him to betray Khalid Murat. Murat
had not quite trusted Spalko; he'd had a keen nose for duplicity. But now Murat was gone.
Spalko had no doubt that the Chechens would perform as he envisioned. On the other
front, the damnable Alexander Conklin was dead and the CIA was convinced Jason
Bourne was his murderer, two birds with one stone. Still, there was the core issue of the
weapon and of Felix Schiffer. He felt the intense pressure of what still needed to be done.
He knew that he was running out of time; there was much yet to be accomplished.
He got off at a mid-level floor accessible only with a magnetic key he wore. Letting
himself into his sun-splashed living quarters, he crossed to the bank of windows
overlooking the Danube, the deep green of Margaret Island, the city beyond. He stood
staring out at the Houses of Parliament, thinking of the time to come, when undreamed-of
power would be his. Sunlight spun off the medieval facade, the flying buttresses, the
domes and spires. Inside, men of power met daily, prattling inconsequentially. His chest
filled with air. It was he, Spalko, who knew where the real power in this world resided.
He held out his hand, clenched it into a fist. Soon they would all know—the American
president in his White House, the Russian president in the Kremlin, the sheiks in their
magnificent Arabian palaces. Soon they would all know the true meaning of fear.
Naked, he padded into the large, opulent bathroom whose tiles were the color of lapis
lazuli. Beneath eight streaming jets, he took a shower, scrubbing himself until his skin
turned red. Then he dried himself with a thick white oversized Turkish towel and
changed into jeans and a denim shirt.
At a gleaming stainless-steel wet-bar, he drew a cup of freshly brewed coffee from the
automatic maker. He added cream and sugar, a dollop of whipped cream from the halffridge below. For several moments thereafter, he stood sipping the coffee, allowing his

mind to go pleasurably out of focus, allowing the anticipation to build. There were so
many wonderful things to look forward to today!
Setting down the coffee cup, he tied on a butcher's apron. He eschewed his loafers,
polished to a wicked shine, for a pair of green rubber garden boots.
Sipping the delicious coffee, he crossed to a wood-paneled wall. There was a small
table with one drawer, which he pulled open. Inside was a box of latex gloves. Humming
to himself, he drew out a pair, snapped them on. Then he pressed a button and two of the
wood panels slid aside. He stepped through into a decidedly odd room. The walls were of
black concrete; the floor was composed of white tiles, lower in the center where a huge
drain was set. A hose on a reel was attached to one wall. The ceiling was heavily baffled.
The only furniture was a wooden table, scarred, stained dark in places with blood, and a
dentist's chair with modifications made to Spalko's exacting specifications. Beside the
chair was a three-tiered cart on which lay a gleaming array of metal implements barbed
with ominous-looking ends—straight, hooked and corkscrewed.
In the chair, his wrists and ankles bound in steel cuffs, was László Molnar, as naked as
the day he was born. Molnar's face and body were cut, bruised and swollen, his eyes sunk
deep within black circles of agony and despair. Spalko entered the room as briskly and
professionally as any doctor.
"My dear Laszl6,1 must say you're looking the worse for wear." He stood close enough
to see Molnar's nostrils flare at the scent of the coffee. "It's to be expected, though, isn't it?
You've had quite a difficult night. Nothing you could have expected when you set out for
the opera, eh? But not to worry, the excitement isn't over yet." He put down the coffee
cup at Molnar's elbow, took up one of the instruments. "This one, I think, yes."
"What... what are you going to do?" Molnar asked in a cracked voice, thin as
parchment.
"Where is Dr. Schiffer?" Spalko asked in a conversational tone of voice.
Molnar's head jerked from side to side, his jaw clamped shut, as if to ensure that no
words would pass his lips.
Spalko tested the needlepoint of the instrument. "I honestly don't know why you
hesitate, László. I have the weapon, though Dr. Schiffer is missing—"
"Taken from under your nose," Molnar whispered.
Spalko, smiling, applied the instrument to his prisoner and in short order Molnar was
sufficiently stimulated to scream.
Standing back for a moment, he brought the coffee cup to his lips, swallowed. "As
you've no doubt realized by now, this room is soundproof. You can't be heard—no one is
going to save you, least of all Vadas; he doesn't even know that you're missing."
Taking up another instrument, he spun it into Molnar. "So you see there is no hope," he
said. "Unless you tell me what I want to know. As it happens, László, I'm your one and
only friend now; I'm the one who can save you." He grasped Molnar under the chin and
kissed his bloody forehead. "I'm the one who truly loves you."
Molnar closed his eyes and again shook his head.
Spalko looked directly into Molnar's eyes. "I don't want to hurt you, László. You know
that, don't you?" His voice, unlike his actions, was gentle. "But your stubbornness

troubles me." He continued his work on Molnar. "I am wondering whether you
understand the true nature of the circumstances into which you've fallen. This pain you
feel is Vadas' doing. It's Vadas who got you into these dire straits. Conklin, too, I
shouldn't wonder, but Conklin is dead."
Molnar's mouth opened wide in a terrible scream. There were gaping black holes
where his teeth had been slowly and agonizingly pulled.
"Let me assure you that I continue my work most reluctantly," Spalko said with great
concentration. It was important at this stage for Molnar to understand, even through the
pain being inflicted on him. "I'm only the instrument of your own stubbornness. Can't you
see that it's Vadas who must pay for this?"
Spalko let up for a moment. Blood had splattered his gloves and he was breathing as
hard as if he had just run up three flights of stairs. Interrogation for all its pleasures was
not easy work. Molnar began to mewl.
"Why do you bother, László? You are praying to a god that doesn't exist and, therefore,
can't protect you or help you. As the Russians say, 'Pray to God; row to shore.'" Spalko's
smile was an intimation of a confidence shared between comrades. "And the Russians
ought to know, eh? Their history is written in blood. First the tsars and then the
apparatchiks, as if the Party was any better than a line of despots!
"I tell you, László, the Russians may have failed utterly at politics, but when it comes
to religion, they have the right idea. Religion—all religion— is false. It's the grand
delusion of the weak-willed, the fearful, the sheep of the world, who haven't the strength
to lead but want only to be led. Never mind that it's inevitably to their own slaughter."
Spalko shook his head sadly, sagely. "No, no, the only reality is power, László. Money
and power. This is what matters, nothing else."
Molnar had relaxed somewhat during this discourse, which, in its conversational tone
and illusion of camaraderie, had been meant to bind him to his interrogator. Now,
however, his eyes opened wide in naked panic as Spalko began again. "Only you can help
yourself, László. Tell me what I want to know. Tell me where Vadas has hidden Felix
Schiffer."
"Stop!" Molnar gasped. "Please stop!"
"I can't stop, László. Surely by now you can understand that. You're in control of this
situation now." As if to illustrate his point, Spalko applied the instrument. "Only you can
make me stop!"
A look of confusion came over Molnar, and he gazed wildly around as if only now
realizing what was happening to him. Studying him, Spalko understood. It often
happened this way near the end of a successful interrogation. The subject did not come
step by step to the altar of confession, but rather resisted as long as he was able. The mind
could manage only so much. As some point, like a stretched rubber band, it reached its
limit, and when it snapped back, a new reality—the reality artfully erected by the
interrogator—was established.
"I don't—"
"Tell me," Spalko said in a velvet voice, his gloved hand stroking his victim's sweating
brow. "Tell me and this will all be over, gone like awaking from a dream."
Molnar's eyes rolled upward. "Do you promise?" he asked like a small child.

"Trust me. László. I'm your friend. I want what you want, an end your suffering."
Molnar was crying now, big tears welling up in his eyes, turning cloudy and pink as
they rolled down his cheeks. And then he began to sob as he had not done since he was a
small child.
Spalko said nothing. He knew they were at the crucial stage. It was all or nothing now:
Either Molnar would step off the precipice to which Spalko had carefully brought him, or
he would force himself to drown in the pain.
Molnar's body shook in the storm of emotion the interrogation had unleashed. In time,
he put his head back. His face was gray and terribly drawn; his eyes still with their glaze
of tears seemed to have shrunk farther back in their sockets. There was no sign of the
bright-cheeked, slightly drunk operaphile Spalko's men had drugged in Underground. He
had been transformed. He was utterly spent.
"God forgive me," he whispered hoarsely. "Dr. Schiffer is in Crete." He babbled an
address.
"There's a good boy," Spalko said softly. Now the final piece of the puzzle had fallen
into place. Tonight, he and his "staff" would be on their way to retrieve Felix Schiffer and
finish the process of extracting from him the information required to launch their assault
on the Oskjuhlid Hotel.
Molnar made a small animal noise as Spalko dropped the instrument. His bloodshot
eyes rolled in his head; he was on the verge of weeping again.
Slowly, tenderly, Spalko placed the coffee cup to the other's lips, watched with
disinterest as he convulsively drank down the hot, sweet coffee. "At last, deliverance."
Whether he was speaking to Molnar or to himself was an open question.

CHAPTER THIRTEEN
At night, Budapest's Parliament resembled a great Magyar shield against the invading
hordes of yore. To the average tourist, awestruck at its size as well as its beauty, it
appeared solid, timeless, inviolable. But to Jason Bourne, newly arrived from his
harrowing passage out of Washington, D.C., and Paris, the Parliament seemed nothing
more than a fantasy city straight out of a children's book, a confection of unearthly white
stone and pale copper that could at any moment collapse beneath the fall of darkness.
He was in a bleak mood when the taxi dropped him at the glowing dome of the
Mammut shopping mall, near Moszkva ter, where he intended to buy himself new clothes.
He had entered the country as Pierre Montefort, French military courier, and had
therefore been given only the most cursory inspection by Hungarian Immigration. But he
needed to get rid of the uniform Jacques had provided for him before he showed up at the
hotel as Alex Conklin.
He bought a pair of cords, a Sea Island cotton shirt and black turtleneck sweater, thinsoled black boots and a black leather bomber jacket. He moved through the stores, the
crowds of shoppers, gradually absorbing their energy, for the first time in many days
feeling part of the world at large. He realized this sudden lightening of mood was because

his mind had resolved the enigma of Khan. Of course, he wasn't Joshua; he was a superb
con artist. An entity unknown—either Khan or someone who had hired him—wanted to
get to Bourne, shake him up so badly that he would lose his concentration and forget
about the murders of Alex Conklin and Mo Panov. If they weren't able to kill him, then at
least they would make him go off on a wild goose chase searching for his phantom son.
How Khan or whoever had hired him knew about Joshua was another question he needed
to answer. Still, now that he had reduced the shock to a rational problem, his supremely
logical mind could parse the problem into its separate parts and this would lead him to
devising a plan of attack.
Bourne needed information that only Khan could provide. He needed to turn the tables
on Khan, to draw him into a trap. The first step was to ensure that Khan knew where he
was. He had no doubt that Khan would be in Paris by now, having known the destination
of the Rush Service flight. Khan might even have heard about Bourne's "death" on the Al.
In fact, from what he knew of Khan, he was, like Bourne, an accomplished chameleon. If
Bourne were in his place, the first place he'd look for information was the Quai d'Orsay.
Twenty minutes later Bourne strode out of the mall complex, got into a taxi that was
letting off a passenger, and in no time he was in front of the imposing stone portico of the
Danubius Grand Hotel on Margaret Island. A uniformed doorman escorted him inside.
Bourne, feeling as if he hadn't slept in a week, crossed the gleaming marble foyer. He
introduced himself to the front desk clerk as Alexander Conklin.
"Ah, Mr. Conklin, you're expected. Please wait a moment, won't you?"
The man vanished into an inner office out of which, a moment later, emerged the hotel
manager.
"Welcome, welcome! I'm Mr. Hazas and I'm at your disposal." This gentleman was
short, squat and dark, with a pencil mustache and hair parted down the side. He extended
a hand, which was warm and dry. "Mr. Conklin, such a pleasure." He gestured. "Would
you be so good as to come with me, please?"
He led Bourne through into his office, whereupon he opened a safe, extracting a
package roughly the size and shape of a shoebox, which he had Bourne sign for. On the
wrapping was printed alexander conklin. hold for pick-up. There were no stamps.
"The package was hand-delivered," the manager said in response to Bourne's query.
"By whom?" Bourne asked.
Mr. Hazas spread his hands. "I'm afraid I don't know."
Bourne felt a sudden flush of anger. "What do you mean, you don't know? Surely, the
hotel must keep records of delivered packages."
"Oh, assuredly, Mr. Conklin. As in everything, we are meticulous in this area.
However, in this particular case—and I cannot say how—there appears to be no record
whatsoever." He smiled hopefully even as he shrugged helplessly.
After three days of constantly fighting for his life, of having to absorb shock after
shock, he found he had no reservoir of patience left. Anger and frustration flared into
blind rage. Kicking the door shut, he grabbed Hazas up by his heavily starched shirtfront,
slammed him so hard against the wall, the hotel manager's eyes fairly bugged out of his
head.

"Mr. Conklin," he stammered, "I don't—"
"I want answers!" Bourne shouted, "and I want them now!"
Mr. Hazas, clearly terrified, was fairly weeping. "But I have no answers." His blunt
fingers fluttered. "There ... there's the ledger! See for yourself."
Bourne released the hotel manager, whose legs collapsed immediately, depositing him
on the floor. Bourne ignored him, went to his desk, took up the ledger. He could see the
entries laboriously written out in two distinct handwritings, one crimped, the other
fussy—presumably the day and night managers. He was only mildly surprised to learn
that he could read Hungarian. Turning the ledger a bit, he ran his eye up and down the
columns, looking for any erasures, any hint that the ledger had been tampered with. He
found nothing.
He whirled on Mr. Hazas, hauled him up from his curled position. "How do you
account for this package not being logged in?"
"Mr. Conklin, I myself was here when it was delivered." The hotel manager's eyes
showed their whites all around. His skin had gone pale; it crawled with sweat. "That is to
say, I was on duty. I swear to you one moment it was there on the top of the check-in
counter. It simply appeared. I didn't see the person who brought it and neither did anyone
on my staff. It was noon, check-out time, a very busy period for us. It must have been left
anonymously, deliberately—nothing else makes sense."
He was right, of course. In an instant, Bourne's intense rage drained away, leaving him
wondering why he had so terrorized this perfectly harmless man. He let the hotel
manager go.
"My apologies, Mr. Hazas. It's been a long day and I've had a number of difficult
negotiations."
"Yes, sir." Mr. Hazas was doing his best to straighten his tie and jacket, all the while
eyeing Bourne as if at any moment he might launch another attack.
"Of course, sir. The business world puts strains on all of us." He coughed, regaining a
semblance of his composure. "May I suggest a spa treatment— there's nothing like a
steam and massage to restore the inner balance." "That's very kind of you," Bourne said.
"Perhaps later." "The spa closes at nine o'clock," Mr. Hazas said, relieved that he had
gotten a sane response from this madman. "But it only takes a call from me to keep it
open for you."
"Another time, thanks very much. Please have a toothbrush and paste sent up to the
suite. I forget to bring some," Bourne said, opening the door and walking out.
The moment he was left alone, Hazas opened a drawer in his desk and, with a hand
that trembled terribly, he took out a bottle of schnapps. Filling a shotglass, he spilled
some onto his ledger. He didn't care; he swigged it down, felt the liquor burn its fiery
path into his stomach. When he had calmed himself sufficiently, he picked up the phone,
dialed a local number.
"He arrived not ten minutes ago," he said to the voice at the other end. There was no
need to identify himself. "My impression? He's a madman. I'll tell you what I mean. He
almost choked me to death when I wouldn't tell him who delivered the package."

The receiver slipped in the sweat of his palm and he switched hands. He poured
himself another two fingers of schnapps.
"Of course I didn't tell him, and there's no record of the delivery anywhere. I saw to it
myself. He searched carefully enough, I'll give him that." He listened for a moment. "He
went up to his suite. Yes, I'm sure."
He put down the phone, then just as quickly dialed another number, delivered the same
message, this time to a different and far more terrifying master. Finally, he slumped back
in his chair and closed his eyes. Thank God my part in this is over, he thought.
Bourne took the elevator up to the top floor. The key opened one of the double doors
of solid polished teak, and Bourne walked into a large one-bedroom suite furnished in
sumptuous fabrics. Outside the window, the one-hundred-year-old parkland loomed dark
and leafy. The island had been named after Margaret, the daughter of King Bela IV who
lived in a Dominican convent here during the thirteenth century, the ruins of which were
brightly lit on the east bank. He was already undressing as he went through the suite,
dropping each article of clothing behind him as he made for the gleaming bathroom. He
threw the package down on the bed unopened.
He spent ten blessed minutes naked under a spray of water as hot as he could tolerate,
then he soaped up, scrubbing the accumulated grime and sweat off him. Gingerly, he
tested his ribs, the muscles of his chest, seeking a final assessment of the damage Khan
had inflicted on him. His right shoulder was very sore, and he spent another ten minutes
carefully stretching and gently exercising it. He had nearly dislocated it when he had
grabbed the tanker truck's rung, and it hurt like hell. He suspected that he had torn some
ligaments, but there was nothing he could do about it except try not to overwork the area.
After standing under an icy spray for three minutes, he stepped out of the shower and
toweled off. Wrapped in a luxurious bathrobe, he sat on the bed, unwrapped the package.
Inside was a gun with extra ammunition. Alex, he asked, not for the first time, what in the
world were you involved in?
For a long time, he sat staring at the weapon. There seemed something evil about it, a
darkness seeping out of the barrel. And it was then that Bourne realized that the darkness
was bubbling up from the depths of his own unconscious. All at once, he saw that his
reality was not at all as he had imagined it at the Mammut mall. It wasn't neat and orderly,
rational as a mathematical equation. The real world was chaotic; rationality was merely
the system human beings tried to impose on random events in order the make them
appear orderly. His explosion of rage was not at the hotel manager, he realized with
something of a shock, but at Khan. Khan had shadowed him, bedeviled him, and in the
end had tricked him. He wanted nothing less than to pummel that face into the ground, to
expunge it from his memory.
The sight of the Buddha had caused the four-year-old Joshua to appear in his mind's
eye. It was twilight in Saigon, the sky saffron and greenish-gold. Joshua was running out
of the house by the river as David Webb drew up on his return from work. Webb took
Joshua up in his arms, swung him around, kissed his cheeks, though the boy shied away.
He never did like being kissed by his father.
Bourne now saw his son tucked into bed at night. The crickets and tree frogs were
singing and lights from passing boats swept across the far wall of the room. Joshua was

listening as Webb read him a story. On a Saturday morning Webb played catch with
Joshua, using a baseball he had brought all the way from America. The light struck
Joshua's innocent face, turning it incandescent.
Now Bourne blinked and despite himself he saw the small stone Buddha hanging
around Khan's neck. He leaped up, and with a guttural cry of utter despair flung the lamp,
blotter, writing pad, crystal ashtray off the table. Hands balled into fists, he struck himself
repeatedly in the head. With a moan of despair, he fell to his knees, rocking himself. Only
the phone ringing brought him around.
Viciously, he willed his head to clear. The phone kept on ringing and for a moment he
had the urge to let it ring. Instead, he picked it up. "It's Janos Vadas," came a whispered,
smoke-roughened voice. "Matthias Church. Midnight, not a moment later." The line
clicked dead before Bourne could utter a word.
When Khan learned that Jason Bourne was dead, he felt as if he'd been turned inside
out, as if all the nerves inside him had for one instant been exposed to the corrosive
outside air. He touched the back of his hand to his forehead, certain that he was burning
up from the inside out.
He was in Orly Airport, talking with the Quai d'Orsay. It had been ridiculously easy to
get information from them. He was posing as a reporter from Le Monde, the French
newspaper, whose credentials he had obtained— for an obscene price—from his Parisian
contact. Not that it mattered to him; he had more money than he knew what to do with,
but the time involved waiting had somehow put him on edge. As the minutes dragged
into hours, as the afternoon turned into evening, he had realized that his vaunted patience
had been shredded. The moment he had seen David Webb—Jason Bourne—time had
been turned inside out, the past had become the present. His hands clenched into fists and
a pulse beat strongly in his temple; how many times since sighting Bourne had he felt as
if he was losing his mind? The absolute worst moment had been sitting on the bench in
Old Town Alexandria, speaking to him as if there was nothing between them, as if the
past had been rendered moot and meaningless, as if it had been part of someone else's life,
someone Khan had only imagined. The unreality of it—a moment he had dreamed of,
prayed for for years—had eviscerated him, leaving him feeling as if every nerve-ending
had been rubbed raw, every emotion he had spent years trying to harness and suppress
was now rebelling, rising to the surface, sickening him. And now came this news, like a
hammerblow from heaven. He felt as if the void inside him he assumed would be filled
had only become wider, deeper, threatening to swallow him whole. He could not bear to
be here a moment longer.
One moment he was talking, notepad in hand, with the Quai d'Orsay press liaison and
the next moment he was hurtled back in time to the jungles of Vietnam, to the wood and
bamboo house of Richard Wick, the missionary, a tall, slender man with a somber
demeanor who had taken him from out of the wild after he'd escaped from the
Vietnamese gunrunner he'd killed. Nevertheless, he was quick to laughter and there was a
softness to his brown eyes that spoke of a great sympathy. Wick might have been a tough
taskmaster in converting the heathen Khan into a child of Christ, but in the more intimate
time of dinner and its quiet aftermath, he was kind and gentle and, in the end, provoked
Khan's trust.

So much so, that one evening Khan made up his mind to tell Wick about his past, to
lay bare his soul in order that he be healed. Khan desperately wanted to be healed, to
vomit up the abscess that had been churning its poison inside him as it grew ever larger.
He wanted to confess his rage at his abandonment, he wanted to be rid of it, for he had
lately come to understand that he was being held prisoner by his extreme emotions.
He longed to confide in Wick, to describe to him the roil of emotion churning in his
guts, but the opportunity never arose. Wick was extremely busy bringing the Word of
God to "this forlorn Godless backwater." As such, he sponsored Bible study groups of
which Khan was ordered to be a part. In fact, one of Wick's favorite pastimes involved
calling on Khan to rise in front of this group and recite from memory sections of the
Bible, like some form of idiot savant shown off for money at a carnival side show.
Khan hated it, felt humiliated by it. In fact, strange to say, the more proud of him Wick
seemed the greater his humiliation. Until, one day, the missionary brought in another
young boy. But because the boy was Caucasian, the orphan of a missionary couple of
Wick's acquaintance, Wick lavished the love and attention on him that Khan had craved
and now saw that he'd never had and, worse, never would have. Still, his abominable
recitations continued while the other boy sat and watched, silent, free of the humiliation
that racked Khan.
He could never get over the fact of Wick using him, and it was only on the day he ran
away that he understood the depths of Wick's betrayal of him. His benefactor, his
protector, was not interested in him—in Khan—but rather in adding another convert,
bringing another savage into the light of God's love.
At that moment, his cell phone rang, and he was dragged back into the awful present.
He looked at his phone's screen to see who was calling, then, excusing himself, stepped
away from the Quai d'Orsay officer into the swirling anonymity of the concourse proper.
"This is a surprise," he said into his phone.
"Where are you?" Stepan Spalko's voice sounded curt, as if he had too many things on
his mind.
"Orly Airport. I've just learned from the Quai d'Orsay that David Webb is dead."
"Is that so?"
"It seems he rode a motorcycle into the grille of an oncoming truck." Khan paused for
a moment, waiting for a reaction. "I must say you don't sound happy. Isn't that what you
wanted?"
"It's premature to celebrate Webb's death, Khan," Spalko said dryly. "I've heard from
my contact at the desk of the Danubius Grand Hotel here in Budapest that Alexander
Conklin just checked in."
Khan was so shocked that he felt his knees begin to give out, and he walked to a wall,
leaned against it. "Webb?"
"It isn't Alex Conklin's ghost!"
To his chagrin, he discovered that he'd broken out into a cold sweat. "But how can you
be sure it's him?"
"I got a description from my contact. I've seen the composite drawing that's been
circulated."

Khan gritted his teeth. He knew the conversation would likely lead to a bad end, and
yet he saw himself moving inexorably forward. "You knew David Webb was Jason
Bourne. Why didn't you tell me?"
"I don't see why I needed to," Spalko said blandly. "You asked about Webb and I
delivered. I'm not in the habit of reading people's minds. But I applaud your initiative."
Khan was gripped by a spasm of hatred so strong he felt himself shiver. He kept his
voice calm, however. "Now that Bourne's gotten all the way to Budapest, how long do
you think it will take him to follow his leads back to you?"
"I've already taken steps to ensure that doesn't happen," Spalko said. "But it occurs to
me that I wouldn't have needed to go through the trouble if you'd killed the sonuvabitch
when you had the chance."
Khan, distrustful of a man who had lied to him, who had, furthermore, played him for a
cat's-paw, felt another devastating stab of anger. Spalko wanted him to kill Bourne, but
why? He was going to find that out before he completed his own act of vengeance. When
he spoke next, he'd lost a modicum of his icy self-control so that his voice took on a
decidedly sharp edge. "Oh, I'll kill Bourne," he said. "But it'll be on my terms, according
to my timetable, not yours."
Humanistas, Ltd. owned three hangars at Ferihegy Airport. In one of them, a container
truck was backed up to a small jet on whose curving silver fuselage was painted the
Humanistas logo: the green cross held in the palm of a hand. Uniformed men were
loading the last of the weapons crates on board while Hasan Arsenov checked the
manifest. When he went to talk to one of the workers, Stepan Spalko turned to Zina and
in a conversational voice said, "In just a few hours I'm leaving for Crete. I want you to
come with me."
Zina's eyes opened wide in surprise. "Shaykh, I am scheduled to return with Hasan to
Chechnya in order to make the last-minute preparations for our mission."
Spalko's eyes did not leave hers. "Arsenov doesn't need your help with the final
touches. In fact, in my estimation he'll be better off without the ... distraction of having
you around."
Zina, trapped by his gaze, opened her lips.
"I want to make this absolutely clear, Zina." Spalko saw Arsenov coming back toward
them. "I'm not giving you an order. The decision's entirely up to you."
Despite the urgency of the moment, he spoke slowly and distinctly, and the import of
his words wasn't lost on her. He was offering her an opportunity—for what she had no
idea—but it was clear that this was a defining moment in her life. Either choice she made,
there was no going back; by the manner in which he'd spoken to her, he'd made that quite
clear. The decision might be up to her, but she was certain that if she said no, it would be
the end for her in one way or another. The fact was, she didn't want to say no.
"I've always wanted to see Crete," she whispered as Arsenov came up to them.
Spalko nodded to her. Then turned to the Chechen terrorist leader. "Everything
accounted for?"
Arsenov looked up from his clipboard. "How could it be otherwise, Shaykh?" He
checked his watch. "Zina and I will be taking off within the hour."

"Actually, Zina will be accompanying the arms," Spalko said easily. "The shipment is
due to rendezvous with my fishing boat in the Faeroe Islands. I want one of you there to
oversee the transfer and the last leg of the trip to Iceland. You're needed with your unit."
He smiled. "I've no doubt that you can spare Zina for a few days' time."
Arsenov frowned, glanced at Zina, who smartly met his gaze with a neutral look, then
nodded. "It will be as you wish, Shaykh, of course."
Zina found it interesting that the Shaykh had lied to Hasan about his plans for her. She
found herself bound inside the little conspiracy he had woven, both excited and nervous
with anticipation. She saw the look on Hasan's face and part of her felt a pang, but then
she thought of the mystery awaiting her, and the honey of the Shaykh's voice, "I'm
leaving for Crete. I want you to come with me"
Standing beside Zina, Spalko held out his arm and Arsenov gripped his forearm in the
manner of warriors. "La illaha ill Allah"
"La illaha ill Allah," Arsenov replied, bowing his head.
"There's a limousine waiting outside to take you to the passenger terminal. Until
Reykjavik, my friend." Spalko turned away, walked over to the pilot to speak with him a
moment, leaving Zina to say her farewell to her current lover.
Khan felt ravaged by unfamiliar emotions. Forty minutes later, waiting for the flight to
Budapest to board, he still had not gotten over the shock he'd received on learning that
Jason Bourne was, in fact, alive. He sat, elbows on knees, face in his hands, trying—and
failing miserably—to make sense of the world. To someone like him, whose past
informed every moment of his present, it was impossible to find a pattern that could make
things understandable. The past was a mystery—and his memory of it was a whore that
did the bidding of his subconscious, distorting facts, telescoping events or omitting them
altogether, all in the service of the sac of poison growing inside him.
But these emotions running rampant through him were even more devastating. He was
enraged by the fact that he'd needed Stepan Spalko to tell him that Jason Bourne was still
alive. Why hadn't his normally finely tuned instincts told him to check a little deeper?
Would an agent of Bourne's skills run into the grille of an oncoming truck? And where
was the body? Had there been a proper identification? He'd been told they were still
sifting through the remains, that the explosion and subsequent fire had done so much
damage that it would take hours more, if not days, to make sense of it all, and even then,
there might not be enough found to give them a confirming ID. He should have been
suspicious. It was a ploy he would use—in fact, he had employed a variant three years
ago when he needed to make a very hot exit from the docks in Singapore.
But there was another question running over and over in his mind, and though he'd
been trying to block it out, he couldn't. What had he felt at the precise moment of
knowing that Jason Bourne was still alive? Elation? Fear? Rage? Despair? Or was it a
melange of all of these—a sickening kaleidoscope that ran the gamut and back again?
He heard his flight being called, and in a something of a daze, he joined the line to
board.

Spalko, walking past the entrance to the Eurocenter Bio-I Clinic at 75 Hat-tyu utca,
was deep in thought. It appeared as if Khan was going to present a problem. Khan had his
uses; he was better than anyone else at eliminating targets, there could be no debate on
that score, but even that rare talent faded against the danger he felt Khan was becoming.
This very question had been much on his mind ever since the first time Khan had failed
to kill Jason Bourne. Something anomalous in the situation had stuck in his craw like a
fish bone, and ever since, he'd been trying to cough it up or to swallow it. And yet, there
it still sat, refusing to be dislodged. With this last conversation, he was acutely aware that
he'd need to see to the final disposition of his former assassin-for-hire without delay. He
couldn't afford anyone getting close to his forthcoming operation in Reykjavik. Bourne or
Khan, it didn't matter now. In this regard, they were both equally dangerous.
He entered the cafe around the corner from the ugly modernist structure of the clinic.
He smiled into the bland face of the man, tilted slightly up at him now.
"Sorry, Peter," he said as he slid into a chair at their table.
Dr. Peter Sido raised a hand equably. "It's of no moment, Stepan. I know how busy you
are."
"Not too busy to find Dr. Schiffer."
"And thank God for that!" Sido ladled whipped cream into his coffee cup. He shook
his head. "Honestly, Stepan, I don't know how I'd do without you and your contacts.
When I discovered that Felix was missing, I was ready to lose my mind."
"Don't worry, Peter. Every day we're closer to finding him. Trust me."
"Oh, I do." Sido was in all ways physically unremarkable. He was of middle height and
weight with eyes the color of mud, magnified behind steel-rimmed spectacles, and short
brown hair that seemed to fall across his scalp with no design or attention from him. He
wore a brown herringbone tweed suit, slightly shabby at the cuffs, white shirt and a
brown-and-black tie that was at least a decade out of date. He might have been a
salesman or an undertaker, but he was not, for his unremarkable exterior concealed a
most remarkable mind.
"The question I have for you," Spalko said now, "is whether you have the product for
me."
Sido was apparently expecting the question because he nodded immediately. "It's all
synthesized and ready whenever you need it."
"Did you bring it?"
"Just the sample. The rest is safely locked away in the Bio-I Clinic's cold room. And
don't worry about the sample; it's locked in a travel case I made myself. The product is
extremely delicate. You see, up until the moment it's to be used, it must be kept at minus
thirty-two degrees Celsius. The case I constructed has its own integrated cooling unit that
will last for forty-eight hours." He reached beneath the table, brought up a small metal
box more or less the size of two stacked paperback books. "Is that long enough?"
"Quite enough, thank you." Spalko took possession of the box. It was heavier than it
looked, no doubt owing to the refrigeration unit "It's in the vial I specified?"
"Of course." Sido sighed. "I still don't fully understand why you need such a lethal
pathogen."

Spalko studied him for a moment. He took out a cigarette and lit it. He knew that to
come up with an explanation too quickly would spoil the effect, and with Dr. Peter Sido
effect was everything. Though he was a genius at creating airborne pathogens, the good
doctor's people skills left something to be desired. Not that he was much different from
most scientists with their noses in their beakers, but in this case, Side's naivete suited
Spalko's purposes perfectly. He wanted his friend back, nothing else much mattered,
which was why he wouldn't listen too carefully to Spalko's explanation. It was his
conscience that needed reassuring, nothing more.
Spalko spoke at last. "As I said, I was contacted by the joint American-British AntiTerrorist Task Force."
"Will they be at the summit next week?"
"Of course," Spalko lied. There was no joint American-British Anti-Terrorist Task
Force except for the one he had concocted. "In any case, they're on the verge of a
breakthrough against the threat of bioterrorism, which, as you know better than most,
includes lethal airborne pathogens as well as chemical substances. They need to test it,
which is why they came to me, and why we've made this agreement. I find Dr. Schiffer
for you and you provide the product the task force needs."
"Yes, I know all that. You explained..." Side's voice trailed off. He played nervously
with his spoon, drumming it up and down against his napkin until Spalko asked him to
stop.
Sorry," he mumbled and pushed his spectacles back up the bridge of his nose. "But
what I still don't understand is what they're going to do with the product. I mean, you
mentioned a test of some sort."
Spalko leaned forward. Now was the crucial time; he had to sell Sido. He looked to his
left and right. When he spoke, he lowered his voice considerably. "Listen very carefully.
Peter. I've told you more than I perhaps should have. This is all most top-secret, d'you
see?"
Sido, hunched forward in response, nodded his head.
"In fact, I'm afraid that I've violated the confidentiality agreement they made me sign
just by telling you this much."
"Oh, dear." Side's expression was mournful. "I've put you at risk."
"Please don't worry about that, Peter. I'll be fine," Spalko said. "Unless, of course, you
tell someone."
"Oh, but I wouldn't. Never."
Spalko smiled. "I know you wouldn't, Peter. I trust you, you see."
"And I appreciate that, Stepan. You know I do."
Spalko had to bite his lip in order not to laugh. Instead, he dove deeper into this farce.
"I don't know what the test is, Peter, because they haven't told me," he said so softly that
the other was obliged to lean in so close their noses were almost touching. "And I
wouldn't ask."
"Of course not."
"But I believe—and you must also—that these people are doing their utmost to keep us
safe in an increasingly unsafe world." What it always boiled down to, Spalko thought,

was a matter of trust. But for the patsy—in this case, Sido—to be taken in, he had to
know that you had given him your trust. After that, you could fleece him of everything he
owned and he'd never suspect it was you who'd done it to him. "I say, whatever they have
to do, we must help them in any way we can. This is what I told them when they first
approached me."
"It's what I would've told them, as well." Sido wiped the perspiration off his
unremarkable upper lip. "Believe me, Stepan, if you can count on anything you can count
on that."
The U.S. Naval Observatory at Massachusetts Avenue and 34th Street was the official
source for all standard time in the United States. It was one of the few places in the
country where the moon, the stars and the planets were kept under constant observation.
The largest telescope on the property was more than one hundred years old and was still
in use. Peering through it in 1877, Dr. Asaph Hall discovered the two moons of Mars.
Nobody knows why he chose to call them Deimos (Anxiety) and Phobos (Fear), but the
DCI knew that when his melancholia lay most deeply about him, he was drawn to the
observatory. That was why he'd had an office set up for himself deep in the heart of the
building, not far from Dr. Hall's telescope.
It was here that Martin Lindros found him on a closed-circuit teleconference linkup
with Jamie Hull, head of the U.S. security detail in Reykjavik.
"Feyd al-Saoud I'm not concerned with," Hull was saying in his rather supercilious
voice. "The Arabs don't know shit about modern-day security, so they're happy to take
our lead." He shook his head. "It's the Russian, Boris Illyich Karpov, who's giving me a
royal pain in the ass. He questions everything. If I say white, he says black. I think the
fucker gets off on arguing."
"Are you saying you can't handle one goddamn Russian security analyst, Jamie?"
"Uh, what?" Hull's blue eyes looked startled and his ginger mustache jumped up and
down. "No, sir. Not at all."
"Because I can have you replaced in a heartbeat." The DCI's voice projected a thorny
note of cruelty.
"No, sir."
"And believe me, I will. I'm in no fucking mood for—"
"That won't be necessary. I'll get Karpov under control."
"See that you do." Lindros could hear the sudden weariness in the old warrior's voice,
hoped Jamie couldn't detect it through the electronic connection. "We need a solid front
before, during and after the president's visit. Is that clear?"
"Yessir."
"No sign of Jason Bourne, I suppose."
"None whatsoever, sir. Believe me, we've been extra vigilant."
Lindros, aware that the DCI had gotten all the information he required for the moment,
cleared his throat.
"Jamie, my next appointment just showed," the DCI said without turning around. "I'll
be in touch tomorrow." He toggled off the teleconferencer, sat with his hands steepled,

staring at the a large color photograph of the planet Mars and its two uninhabitable
moons.
Lindros shrugged off his raincoat, came and sat down beside his boss. The room the
DCI had chosen was small, cramped and over-hot even in the depths of winter. A portrait
of the president was on one wall. Opposite was a single window through which tall pines
could be seen, black and white, all detail washed out of them by the brilliant security
floodlights. "The news from Paris is good," he said. "Jason Bourne is dead."
The DCI picked up his head, a certain animation flooding features that had been slack
moments ago. "They got him? How? I hope the bastard died in a world of pain."
"Chances are he did, sir. He died in a highway collision on the Al just northwest of
Paris. The motorcycle he was driving rammed head-on into an eighteen-wheeler. A Quai
d'Orsay officer was an eyewitness."
"My God," the DCI breathed. "Nothing left but an oil slick." His brows knitted
together. "There can be no doubt?"
"Until we have a confirmed identification, there's always doubt," Lindros said. "We
forwarded Bourne's dental records and a sample of his DNA, but the French authorities
tell me there was a terrific explosion, and in the aftermath the fire burned so hotly that
they fear even the bones might not have survived. In any case, it's going to take them a
day or two to sift through the scene of the accident. They've assured me that they'll be in
touch as soon as they have further information."
The DCI nodded.
"And Jacques Robbinet is unharmed," Lindros added.
"Who?"
"The French Minister of Culture, sir. He was a friend of Conklin's and a sometime
asset. We were afraid he was Bourne's next target."
The two men sat very still. The DCFs eyes had turned inward. Perhaps he was thinking
of Alex Conklin, perhaps he was contemplating the roles anxiety and fear played in
modern life, wondering how Dr. Hall had been so prescient. He had gotten into
clandestine work in the mistaken notion that it would help alleviate the anxiety and fear
with which he had seemed to have been born. Instead, operating in the twilight had done
just the opposite. And yet he had never contemplated leaving his profession. He could not
imagine life without it; his very being was defined by who he was and what he had done
in the sub-rosa world invisible to civilians.
"Sir, if I may say so, it's late."
The DCI sighed. "Tell me something I don't know, Martin."
"I think it's time you went home to Madeleine," Lindros said softly.
The DCI passed a hand across his face. All off a sudden he was very tired. "Maddy's at
her sister's in Phoenix. The house is dark tonight."
"Go home anyway."
As Lindros rose, the DCI turned his head in his deputy's direction. "Martin, listen to
me, you may think this Bourne business is over, but it isn't."
Lindros had taken up his raincoat; now he paused. "I don't understand, sir."

"Bourne may be dead, but in the last few hours of his life he managed to make
monkeys of us."
"Sir—"
"Public spectacles. We can't have that. In this day and age, there's just too much damn
scrutiny. And where there's scrutiny, there are hard questions asked, and these questions
unless immediately put to rest inevitably lead to grave consequences." The DCI's eyes
sparked. "We are lacking only one element to wrap up this sorry episode and consign it to
the dustbin of history."
"What's that, sir?"
"We need a scapegoat, Martin, someone to whom the shit will stick completely,
leaving us smelling like rosebuds in May." He looked hard at his DDCI. "Do you have
someone like that, Martin?"
A cold ball of anxiety had formed in the pit of Lindros' stomach.
"Come, come, Martin," the DCI said with asperity, "do speak up."
Still, Lindros looked at him mutely. He seemed as if he could not get his jaws to work.
"Of course you do, Martin," the DCI snapped.
"You're loving this, aren't you?"
The DCI winced inside at the accusation. Not for the first time, he was grateful that his
boys were safely away from this business where he would have had to hold them down.
No one was going to surpass him; he'd make sure of that. "If you won't name him, I will.
Detective Harris."
"We can't do that to him," Lindros said tightly. He could feel the anger fizzing in his
head like a just-popped can of soda.
"We? Who said anything about we, Martin? This was your assignment. I made that
clear from the get-go. Now it's entirely up to you to assign the blame."
"But Harris didn't do anything wrong."
The DCI arched an eyebrow. "I very much doubt that, but even if it's true, who cares?"
"I do, sir."
"Very well, Martin. Then I suppose you'll be taking the blame for the fiascos in Old
Town and Washington Circle yourself."
Lindros' lips clamped shut. "This is my choice?"
"I don't see any others, do you? The bitch-woman intends to extract her pound of flesh
from me one way or the other. If I have to sacrifice someone, I would damn well rather it
be some aging detective in the Virginia State Police than my own DDCI. If you fell on
your own sword, how do you suppose that would reflect on me, Martin?"
"Christ," Lindros said, in a seething rage, "how in the hell did you manage to survive
this snakepit for so long?"
The DCI stood up, drew on his overcoat. "What makes you think I have?"
Bourne arrived at the Gothic stone edifice of Matthias Church at eleven-forty. He spent
the following twenty minutes reconnoitering the area. The air was crisp and chill, the sky
clear. But near the horizon a bank of thick clouds roiled and on the freshening wind the

damp musk of rain came to him. Now and again a sound or a scent fired something in his
damaged memory. He was certain that he had been here before, though when and on
what mission he couldn't say. Once again, as he touched the void of loss and longing, he
thought of Alex and Mo so strongly he might have been able to conjure them up this very
moment.
With a grimace, he went on with his task, securing the area, making sure as best he
could that the rendezvous site wasn't under enemy surveillance.
At the stroke of midnight, he approached the enormous southern facade of the church
from which rose the eighty-meter Gothic stone tower, laden with gargoyles. A young
woman was standing on the lowest step. She was tall, slim, strikingly beautiful. Her long
red hair shone in the streetlights. Behind her, over the portal was a fourteenth-century
relief of the Virgin Mary. The young woman asked him his name.
"Alex Conklin," he replied.
"Passport, please," she said as crisply as an Immigration official.
He handed it over, watched her as she examined it with her eyes and the pad of her
thumb. She had interesting hands; they were slender, long-fingered, strong, blunt-nailed.
A musician's hands. She could not be more than thirty-five.
"How do I know you're really Alexander Conklin?" she said.
"How does one know anything absolutely?" Bourne said. "Faith."
The woman snorted. "What's your first name?"
"It says right on the pass—"
She gave him a hard look. "I mean your real first name. The one you were born with."
"Alexsei," Bourne said, remembering that Conklin was a Russian emigre".
The young woman nodded. She had a well-sculpted face dominated by green Magyar
eyes, large and hooded, and wide, generous lips. There was about her a certain sharpedged primness, but at the same time a fin de sie-cle sensuality that in its sub-rosa nature
hinted intriguingly of a more innocent century when what was kept unspoken was often
more important than what was freely expressed. "Welcome to Budapest, Mr. Conklin. I'm
Annaka Vadas." She lifted a shapely arm, gestured. "Please come with me."
She led him across the plaza fronting the church and around the corner. In the
shadowed street, a small wooden door with ancient iron bands was barely visible. She
took out a small flashlight, snapped it on. It produced a very powerful beam of light.
Taking an old-fashioned key from her purse, she inserted it in the lock, turned it first one
way, then the other. The door opened at her touch.
"My father is waiting for you inside," she said. They entered the vast interior of the
church. By the wavering beam of the flashlight, Bourne could see that the plastered walls
were iced with colored ornamental design. The frescoes depicted the lives of Hungarian
saints.
"In 1541 Buda fell to the invading Turks and for the next one hundred fifty years the
church became the main mosque of the city," she said. Playing the flashlight over her
subject. "In order to serve their needs, the Turks stripped the furnishings and
whitewashed the magnificent frescoes. Now, however, everything has been restored to
the way it was in the thirteenth century."

Bourne saw dim light up ahead. Annaka led him into the northern section, where there
was a series of chapels. In the one nearest to the chancel the sarcophagi of tenth-century
Hungarian king, Bella III, and his wife, Anne of Chatillon, lay in ghostly precision. In the
former crypt, beside a row of medieval carvings, stood a figure in the shadows.
Janos Vadas extended his hand. As Bourne moved to grasp it, three glowering men
appeared from out of the shadows. Bourne, very quick, drew the gun. This only produced
a smile from Vadas.
"Look at the firing pin, Mr. Bourne. Did you think I would provide you with a gun that
worked?"
Bourne saw that Annaka had a gun trained on him.
"Alexsei Conklin was a long-time friend of mine, Mr. Bourne. And, in any case, your
face is on the news." He had a hunter's calculating face, all dark and brooding brows, a
square jaw and glittering eyes. In his youth he had had a distinct widow's peak, but now,
in his mid-sixties, time had eroded his hairline, leaving a gleaming triangular promontory
on his forehead. "It's believed you killed Alexsei and another man, a Dr. Panov, I believe.
For Alexsei's death alone I would be justified in ordering you killed here and now."
"He was an old friend, more, even—a mentor."
Vadas looked sad, resigned. He sighed. "And you turned on him, I suppose, because
you, like everyone else, want what is in Felix Schiffer's mind."
"I have no idea what you're talking about."
"No, of course you don't," Vadas said with a good degree of skepticism.
"How do you think I knew Alex's real name? Alexsei and Mo Panov were friends."
"Then killing them would have been an act of utter insanity."
"Exactly."
"It is Mr. Hazas' considered opinion that you're insane," Vadas said calmly. "You
remember Mr. Hazas, the hotel manager you almost beat to a pulp. A madman, I believe
he called you."
"So that's how you knew to call me," Bourne said. "I may have twisted his arm a little
too hard, but I knew he was lying."
"He was lying for me," Vadas said with a touch of pride.
Under the watchful gaze of Annaka and the three men, Bourne went across to Vadas,
held out the useless gun. The moment Vadas reached for it, Bourne spun him around. At
the same instant he drew his ceramic gun, pressed it hard against Vadas' temple. "Did you
really think I would use an unknown gun without pulling it apart and putting it back
together again?"
Directing himself to Annaka, he said in a calm, matter-of-fact voice, "Unless you want
your father's brains spattered all over five centuries of history, put down your gun. Don't
look at him; do as I tell you!"
Annaka put down her gun.
"Kick it over here." She did as he ordered.
None of the three men had made a move, and now they wouldn't. Bourne kept one eye
on them just the same. He took the muzzle away from Vadas' temple, let him go.

"I could have shot you dead, if that had been my wish."
"And I would have killed you," Annaka said fiercely.
"I've no doubt you'd have tried," Bourne said. He put up the ceramic gun, showing her
and Vadas' men that had he no intention of using it. "But these are hostile acts. We'd have
to be enemies to make them." Picking up Annaka's gun, he handed it to her, grips first.
Without a word, she took it, aimed it at him.
"What have you turned your daughter into, Mr. Vadas? She would kill for you, yes, but
it also seems as if she would kill too quickly and for no reason at all."
Vadas stepped between Annaka and Bourne, pushed her gun down with his hand. "I've
enough enemies as it is, Annaka," he said softly.
Annaka put away her gun, but her flashing eyes still held a hostility Bourne noted.
Vadas turned to Bourne. "As I said, for you, killing Alexsei would have been an act of
insanity, and yet you seem to be the very opposite of a madman."
"I was set up, made to be the patsy for the killings, so that the real killer would remain
free."
"Interesting. Why?"
"I came here to find that out."
Vadas stared hard at Bourne. Then he looked around him, raised his arms. "I would
have met Alexsei here, you know, had he lived. You see, this is a place of great
significance. Here, at the dawn of the fourteenth century, once stood Buda's first parish
church. The huge pipe organ you see up there on the balcony played at the two weddings
of King Matthias. The last two kings of Hungary, Francis Joseph I and Charles IV, were
crowned on this spot,. Yes, there's great history here, and Alexsei and I, we were going to
change history."
"With the help of Dr. Felix Schiffer, wasn't it?" Bourne said.
Vadas had no time to answer. Just then, an echoing roar sounded and he was thrown
backward, arms outstretched. Blood oozed from a bullethole in his forehead. Bourne
grabbed Annaka, dived onto the stonework paving. Vadas' men turned and, fanning out,
began to return fire as they headed for cover. One was shot almost immediately, and he
skidded over the marble floor, dead before he collapsed. A second gained the edge of a
bench and was desperately trying to get behind it when he, too, was felled by a bullet that
entered his spine. He arched back, his weapon crashing to the floor.
Bourne looked from the third man taking cover to Vadas, who lay sprawled face-up in
a widening pool of blood. He was unmoving, no respiration visible in his chest. More
gunfire brought Bourne's attention back to Vadas' third man, who was now rising out of a
crouch, squeezing off a series of shots, his trajectory upward toward the cathedral's great
organ. His head flung backward and his arms opened wide as a speck of blood on his
chest rapidly widened. He tried to clutch at the fatal wound, but his eyes were already
rolling up in his head.
Bourne looked up into the gloom of the organ balcony, saw a darker shadow flitting,
and he fired. Stone chips flew. Then he had grabbed Annaka's flashlight, playing the
beam over the balcony as he ran toward the spiral stone staircase up to it. Annaka, at last
released and able to make sense of the chaos, saw her father and screamed.

"Back!" Bourne shouted. "You're in danger!"
Ignoring him, Annaka rushed to her father's side.
Bourne covered her, sending more shots into the shadows of the balcony, but he was
not surprised at the lack of return fire. The sniper had achieved his aim; in all liklihood he
was already on the run.
With no more time to waste, Bourne leaped up the staircase up to the balcony. Seeing a
spent shell casing, he kept on going. The balcony appeared deserted. Its floor was stoneflagged, and the wall behind the organ ornately carved wood paneling. Bourne ducked
behind the organ, but the space was deserted. He checked the floor around the organ, then
the wood wall. The spacing around one of the panels appeared slightly different from the
others, one side several millimeters wider as if...
Bourne felt around with his fingertips, discovered that the panel was in fact a narrow
doorway. He went through it, found himself confronting a steep spiral staircase. With his
gun at the ready, he climbed up the treads, which ended at another door. When he pushed
it open, he saw that it gave out onto the rooftop of the church. The moment he poked his
head out, a shot was fired at him. He ducked back but not before seeing a figure making
its way onto the roof tiles, which were pitched at an extreme angle. To make matters
worse, it had begun to rain and the tiles were even more treacherous. The positive side to
this was that the assassin was too engaged with keeping his balance to risk firing off
another shot at Bourne.
Bourne saw immediately that his new boot soles would skid and he pulled them off,
dropped them over the side of the parapet. He then went crab-wise across the roof. Thirty
meters below him, a dizzying drop away, the square in which the church sat gleamed in
the Old World streetlights. Using his fingers and toes to anchor him, he continued his
pursuit of the sniper. In the back of his mind was the suspicion that the figure he was
pursuing was Khan, but how could he have arrived in Budapest before Bourne and why
would he shoot Vadas rather than Bourne?
Lifting his head, he could see the figure was making for the south spire. Bourne
scrambled after him, determined not to let him get away. The tiles were old and crumbly.
One tile split down the center as he grasped it, coming off in his hand, and for a moment,
he flailed about, balancing precariously on the acute pitch. Then he regained his balance,
threw the tile away. It shattered on the flat rooftop of the small chapel extension ten feet
below him.
His mind was racing ahead. The moment of extreme peril for him was when the sniper
reached the safe haven of the spire. If Bourne was still exposed on the roof, the sniper
would have a clear shot at him. It was raining harder now, making touch and sight that
much more difficult. The south spire was no more than a hazy outline some fifty feet
away.
Bourne was three-quarters of the way to the spire when he heard something—the clang
of metal against stone—and he threw himself prone onto the tiles. Water sluiced over him
and as he felt the zing of the bullet whizz past his ear, the tiles near his right knee
exploded and he lost his purchase. He slid down the precipitous slope, tumbling off the
edge.
Instinctively, he had relaxed his body, and when his shoulder struck the roof of the
chapel below, he rolled himself into a ball, using his own momentum to launch himself

across the roof, dissipating the energy of the drop. He fetched up against a stained-glass
window, which kept him out of the sniper's line of sight.
Looking up, he could see that he was not that far from the spire. A lesser tower was
just in front of him, a narrow slit of a window presenting itself. It was medieval in nature
and therefore had no pane of glass in it. He squeezed through, found his way up to the top,
which gave out onto a narrow stone parapet that led directly to the south spire.
Bourne had no way of knowing whether he would become visible to the sniper as he
crossed the parapet. He took a deep breath, bolted out of the doorway, sprinted along the
narrow stone passageway. Ahead of him, he saw the movement of a shadow, and he dove
into a ball as a shot rang out. He was up and running again all in one motion, and before
the sniper could fire again he had left his feet, this time diving head-first through an open
window of the spire.
More shots resounded, and shards of stone flew past him as he scrambled up the spiral
staircase at the core of the spire. Above him, he heard the metallic click that told him his
adversary had run out of ammo, and he leaped up the stairs three at a time, making the
most of his temporary advantage. He heard another metallic sound, and an empty
cartridge came bouncing down the stone stairs. Bounding ahead, he bent his back,
keeping his profile low. No more shots ensued, increasing the probability that he was
gaining on the sniper.
But probability was not good enough; he had to be certain. He aimed Annaka's
flashlight up the spiral, flicked the beam on. At once he saw the trace of a shadow on the
treads just above him, slipping away almost immediately, and he redoubled his efforts.
He switched off the beam before the sniper could get a reading on his position.
They were near the top of the spire now, some eighty meters in the air. There was
nowhere else for the sniper to go. He would have to kill Bourne to get himself out of the
trap. This desperation would make him both more dangerous and more reckless. It was up
to Bourne to use the latter possibility to his advantage.
Up ahead of him, he could see the spire's ending, a circular space surrounded by high
arches that let in the rain and wind, and he checked his headlong ascent. He knew that if
he continued, the chances were good that he would be met with a fusillade of bullets. And
yet he could not stay here. He took his flashlight, set it on a step above him at an angle,
then he lay down, and keeping his head down, he reached out, stretching as far as he
could, and flicked on the beam.
The resulting hail of bullets was deafening. Even while the noise was still echoing up
and down the length of the spire, Bourne had launched himself up the remaining stairs.
He had gambled that the sniper's desperation would lead him to empty his entire cartridge
at what he assumed was Bourne's final assault.
Out of the haze of stone dust, Bourne bull-rushed the sniper, driving him back across
the stone floor, against one of the stone arches. The man slammed his combined fists
down on Bourne's back, driving Bourne to his knees. His head went down, exposing his
neck, too tempting a target to pass up. As the sniper drove a hand-strike at Bourne's neck,
Bourne twisted, grasping the descending arm, using the sniper's own momentum against
him, pulling the man off his feet. Bourne struck him in the kidney as he went down.
The sniper brought his ankles together around Bourne's, twisting, so that Bourne fell
backward. Immediately, the man leaped at him. They grappled hand-to-hand, the light

from the flashlight picked apart by the hail of dust. By its illumination, Bourne saw the
sniper's long, hatchet face, blond hair, light eyes. Bourne was briefly taken aback. He
realized that he'd expected the sniper to be Khan.
Bourne did not want to kill this man; he wanted to question him. He desperately
wanted to know who he was, who had sent him and why Vadas had been marked for
death. But the man fought with the strength and tenacity of the damned, and when he
struck Bourne on the right shoulder, Bourne's arm went numb. The man was on him
before he could shift his stance and protect himself. Three punches in succession sent him
reeling through one of the arches until he was backed over the low stone railing. The man
came after him, his empty gun reversed in his hand so that he could use the butt as a
cudgel.
Shaking his head, Bourne tried to rid himself of the pain in his right side. The sniper
was almost upon him, his right arm raised, the heavy butt of the gun gleaming in the
lights of the square. There was a murderous look on his face, his lips pulled back in an
animal snarl. He swung in a shallow, vicious arc; the butt came down, its clear intention
to shatter Bourne's skull. At the last moment, Bourne slid aside just enough and the
sniper's own momentum sent him hurtling over the rail.
Bourne reacted instantly, reached down and grabbed the man by his hand, but the rain
made the flesh slippery as oil and the fingers slid through his grip. With a scream the man
fell away, plummeting to the pavement far below.

CHAPTER FOURTEEN
With the fall of night, Khan arrived in Budapest. He took a taxi from the airport and
checked into the Danubius Hotel as Heng Raffarin, the name he'd used as a Le Monde
reporter in Paris. This was how he'd come through Immigration, but he was also carrying
other documents, purchased like the other that identified him as a deputy inspector for
Interpol.
"I've flown in from Paris to interview Mr. Conklin," he said in a harassed tone of voice.
"All these delays! I'm frightfully late. Do you think you could inform Mr. Conklin that
I've finally arrived? We're both on rather tight schedules."
As Khan had foreseen, the desk clerk automatically looked at the cubbyholes behind
him, each with a room number printed in gold-leaf. "Mr. Conklin isn't in his suite at the
moment. Would you care to leave a note?"
"I suppose I have no other choice. We'll get a fresh start in the morning." Khan
pretended to write a note for "Mr. Conklin," sealed it, gave it to the clerk. Taking his key,
he turned away, but out of the corner of his eye he watched as the clerk stuck the
envelope in the cubbyhole marked penthouse 3. Satisfied, he took the elevator up to his
room, which was on the floor below the penthouse level.
He washed up, took some implements out of a small bag and went out of his room. He
took the stairway up one flight to the penthouse level. He stood in the corridor a very
long time, simply listening, accustoming himself to the small noises endemic to any

building. He stood, still as stone, waiting for something—a sound, a vibration, a feel—
that would tell him whether to go forward or to retreat.
In the end, nothing untoward presented itself, and so he moved cautiously forward,
reconnoitering the entire corridor, assuring himself that it, at least, was secure. At length,
he found himself in front of the polished teak double doors of Penthouse 3. Extracting a
pick, he inserted it into the lock. A moment later, the door opened.
Again, he stood for some tune in the open doorway, breathing in the suite. Instinct told
him that the room was empty. Still, he was wary of a trap. Swaying slightly with the
effects of sleeplessness and the rising tide of his emotions, he scanned the room. Besides
the remnants of a package the approximate size of a shoebox, there was precious little in
the suite to indicate that it was occupied. Judging by the look of the bed, it hadn't been
slept in. Where was Bourne now? Khan wondered.
At length, he drew his wandering mind back into his body, crossed to the bathroom,
turned on the light. He saw the plastic comb, the toothbrush, toothpaste, tiny bottle of
mouthwash the hotel had provided along with soap, shampoo and hand cream. He
unscrewed the toothpaste top, squeezed out a bit into the sink, washed it away. Then he
pulled out a paper clip and a small silver box. Inside the box were two capsules with
shells of quick-dissolving gelatin. One was white, the other black.
"One pill makes your heart beat, the other makes it slow, and the pills that Father gives
you don't do anything at all," he sang to the tune of "White Rabbit" in a clear tenor as he
extracted the white capsule from its bed.
He was about to place it into the open top of the toothpaste tube, tamp it down with the
end of the paper clip, when something stopped him. He counted to ten, then replaced the
cap, careful to put the tube back precisely as he had found it.
He stood, for a moment, bewildered, staring at the two capsules that he himself had
prepared while waiting for his flight out of Paris. He had been clear, then, about what
he'd wanted to do—the black capsule was filled with just enough krait venom to paralyze
Bourne's body while still allowing his mind to remain conscious and alert. Bourne knew
more about what Spalko was planning than Khan did; he had to, having followed his trail
of leads all the way back to Spalko's home base. Khan wanted to know what Bourne
knew before he killed him. This is what he told himself, at least.
But it was impossible to deny any longer that his mind, so long filled with fevered
visions of revenge, had lately made room for other scenarios. No matter how much
energy he expended on rejecting them, they persisted. In fact, he realized now, the more
violently he dismissed them, the more stubbornly they refused to disappear.
Feeling like a fool, he was standing in the room of his nemesis, unable to follow
through on the plan he had meticulously formulated. Instead, in the theater of his mind he
was replaying the look on Bourne's face when he had seen the carved stone Buddha that
hung by a gold chain around his neck. He clutched at the Buddha now, feeling as he
always did a certain sense of solace and safety in its soft shape and singular weight. What
was wrong with him?
With a small grunt of anger, he turned and stalked out of the suite. On his way down to
his room, he pulled out his cell phone, punched in a local number. After two rings, a
voice answered.

"Yes?" said Ethan Hearn.
"How's the job going?" Khan asked.
"Actually, I'm finding it enjoyable."
"Just as I predicted."
"Where are you?" Humanistas, Ltd.'s newest development officer asked.
"Budapest."
"That's a surprise," Hearn said. "I thought you had a commission in East Africa."
"I've declined it," Khan said. He had reached the lobby and now crossed it, heading to
the front door. "In fact, for the time being I've taken myself off the market."
"Something pretty important must've brought you here."
"It's your boss, as a matter of fact. What have you been able to ferret out?"
"Nothing concrete, but he's up to something, I can tell, and it's very, very big."
"What makes you say that?" Khan asked.
"First, he entertains a pair of Chechens," Hearn said. "On the surface, there's nothing
strange about that. We have an important initiative in Chechnya. And yet it was strange,
very strange, because even though they were dressed as Westerners—the man was
beardless, the woman without her head scarf—I recognized them, well, him-, at least.
Hasan Arsenov, leader of the Chechen rebels."
"Go on," Khan urged, thinking he was getting more than his money's worth from this
mole.
"Then, two nights ago, he asked me to go to the opera," Hearn continued. "He said he
wanted to snag a wealthy prospect by the name of László Molnar."
"What's so strange about that?" Khan said.
"Two things," Hearn replied. "First, Spalko took over midway through the evening. He
pretty much ordered me to take the next day off. Second, Molnar's disappeared."
"Disappeared?"
"Vanished utterly, like he never existed," Hearn said. "Spalko thinks I'm too naive not
to have checked up." He laughed softly.
"Don't get overconfident," Khan warned. "That's when you make a mistake. And,
remember what I told you, don't underestimate Spalko. Once you do, you're as good as
dead."
"I got it, Khan. Christ, I'm not stupid."
"You wouldn't be on my payroll if you were," Khan reminded him. "D'you have this
László Molnar's home address?"
Ethan Hearn gave it to him.
"Now," Khan said, "all you have to do is keep your ears open and your head down. I
want everything of his you can burrow into."
Jason Bourne watched Annaka Vadas as she exited the morgue, where, he suspected,
she had been taken in the company of the police in order to identify her father and the
three men who had been gunned down. As for the sniper, he had landed on his face,

which ruled out identification by dental records. The police must be running his
fingerprints through the EU database. From fragments of the conversation he had
overheard at Matthias Church, the police were rightly curious as to why a professional
assassin would want to kill Janos Vadas, but Annaka had no explanation and at length the
police had given up and allowed her to go. They, of course, had no inkling of Bourne's
involvement. He had stayed away from the investigation by necessity—he was, after all,
an internationally wanted man—but he felt some trepidation. He had no idea whether he
could trust Annaka. It hadn't been that long ago when she had been intent on putting a
bullet through his brain. But he had hoped that his actions following her father's murder
would convince her of his good intentions.
Apparently they had, because she had not told the police about him. Instead, he had
found his boots in the chapel Annaka had shown him, lying between the crypts of King
Bella III and Anne of Chatillon. Bribing a taxi driver, he'd shadowed her to the police
station, and then to the morgue.
Now he watched as the police touched their caps, said their goodnights. They had
offered to drive her home, but she had refused. Instead, she pulled out her cell phone, in
order to call a taxi, he surmised.
When he was certain that she was alone, he quit the shadows in which he had been
hiding, walked quickly across the street toward her. She saw him, put her cell phone
away. Her look of alarm brought him up short.
"You! How did you find me?" She looked around, rather wildly, he thought. "Have
you been following me all this time?"
"I wanted to make sure you were okay."
"My father was shot to death in front of me," she said shortly. "Why would I be okay?"
He was conscious of the fact that they were standing beneath a streetlight. At night, he
always thought in terms of targets and security; it was second nature—he couldn't help it.
"The police here can be difficult."
"Really? And how would you know that?" Apparently, she wasn't interested in his
answer, for she began to walk away from him, her heels click-clacking over the cobbles.
"Annaka, we need each other."
Her back was very straight, her head held high on her long neck. "What would make
you say such an absurd thing?"
"Because it's true."
She turned on her heel, confronting him. "No, it's not true." Her eyes blazed. "It's
because of you that my father's dead."
"Now who's being absurd?" He shook his head. "Your father was murdered because of
whatever he and Alex Conklin were into. That's why Alex was murdered in his home,
and that's why I'm here."
She snorted in derision. Bourne understood the source of her brittle-ness. She had been
forced into a male-dominated arena, perhaps by her father, and was now more or less at
war. At the very least, she was highly defended.
"Don't you want to know who killed your father?"

"Frankly, no." Her balled fist was on one hip. "I want to bury him and forget I ever
heard of Alexsei Conklin and Dr. Felix Schiffer."
"You can't mean that!"
"Do you know me, Mr. Bourne? Do you know anything about me?" Her clear eyes
observed him from her slightly cocked head. "I think not. You're completely in the dark.
That's why you came here, posing as Alexsei. A stupid ruse, transparent as plastic. And
now that you've blundered your way in, now that blood has been spilled, you think it's
your due to find out what my father and Alexsei were up to." "Do you know me,
Annaka?"
A sardonic smile split her face as she took a step closer to him. "Oh, yes, Mr. Bourne, I
know you well. I've seen your kind come and go, each one thinking in the moments
before he is gunned down that he's more clever than the last one." "So who am I?"
"You think I won't tell you? Mr. Bourne, I know exactly who you are. You're a cat
with a ball of string. Your only thought is to unravel that ball of string no matter the cost.
This is all a game to you—a mystery that must be solved. Nothing else matters. You're
denned by the very mystery you seek to unravel. Without it, you wouldn't even exist."
"You're wrong."
"Oh, no, I'm not." The sardonic smile widened. "It's why you can't fathom how I can
walk away from this, why I don't want to work with you, help you find out who killed my
father. Why should I? Will knowing the answer bring him back? He's dead, Mr. Bourne.
He no longer thinks or breathes. He's just a pile of refuse now, waiting for time to finish
what it started."
She turned and began to walk away again. "Annaka—"
"Go away, Mr. Bourne. Whatever you have to say, I'm not interested." He ran to catch
up with her. "How can you say that? Six men have lost their lives because of—"
She gave him a rueful look and he could tell that she was on the verge of tears. "I
begged my father not to get involved, but you know, old friends, the lure of the
clandestine, who knows what it was. I warned him that it would all come to an evil end,
but he just laughed—yes, laughed—and said I was his daughter and couldn't possibly
understand. Well, that put me in my place, didn't it?"
"Annaka, I am being hunted for a double murder I didn't commit. My two best friends
were shot to death and I've been framed as the prime suspect. Can you understand—"
"Jesus, have you not heard a word I've said? Has it all gone in one ear and out the
other?"
"I can't do this alone, Annaka. I need your help. I've nowhere else to turn. My life is
quite literally in your hands. Tell me, please, about Dr. Felix Schiffer. Tell me what you
know and I swear you'll never see me again."
She lived at 106-108 Fo utca in Vizivaros, a narrow neighborhood of hills and steep
stairs, rather than streets, wedged between the Castle District and the Danube. From her
front bay windows you could see Bern ter. It was here, hours before the 1956 Uprising,
that thousands congregated, waving Hungarian flags from which they had painstakingly
and joyously cut the hammer and sickle, prior to marching on parliament.

The apartment was cramped and crowded, primarily because of the concert grand
piano that took up fully half the space of the living room. Books, periodicals and journals
on music history and theory, biographies of composers, conductors, musicians, crammed
the floor-to-ceiling bookcase.
"Do you play?" Bourne asked.
"Yes," Annaka said simply.
He sat down on the piano bench, looked at the music chart splayed on the rack. A
Chopin Nocturne, Opus 9, No. 1 in B-Flat Minor. She would have to be quite
accomplished to tackle that, he thought.
From the bay window in the living room there was a view of the boulevard as well as
the buildings on the other side. A few lights were on; the sound of fifties jazz—
Thelonious Monk—drifted through the night. A dog barked and was still. From time to
time, the rattle of traffic intruded.
After turning on the lamps, she went immediately into the kitchen, put on water for tea.
From a buttercup-colored cupboard, she took out two sets of cups and saucers, and while
the tea was brewing, she uncapped a bottle of schnapps, poured a generous dollop into
each cup.
She opened the refrigerator. "Would you like something to eat? Cheese, a bit of
sausage?" Speaking as if to an old friend.
"I'm not hungry."
"Neither am I." She sighed and shut the door. It was as if, having made the decision to
bring him home, she had also decided to lose the attitude.
They made no more mention of Janos Vadas or Bourne's fruitless pursuit of the killer.
That suited him.
She handed him the laced tea and they went into the living room, sat on a sofa old as a
dowager.
"My father was working with a professional intermediary named László Molnar," she
said without preamble. "He was the one who secreted your Dr. Schiffer."
"Secreted?" Bourne shook his head. "I don't understand."
"Dr. Schiffer had been kidnapped."
Bourne's tension level rose. "By whom?"
She shook her head. "My father knew, but I didn't." She frowned, concentrating. "That
was why Alexsei first contacted him. He needed my father's help in rescuing Dr. Schiffer
and spiriting him away to a secret location."
All at once, he heard Mylene Dutronc's voice in his head: "That day, Alex made and
received many calls in a very short period of time. He was terribly tense and I knew he
was at the crisis point of a hot field operation. I heard Dr. Schiffer's name mentioned
several times. I suspect that he was the subject of the operation." This was the hot field
operation.
"So your father was successful in getting Dr. Schiffer."
Annaka nodded. The lamplight burnished her hair to a deep copper sheen. Her eyes
and half of her forehead were cast in its shadow. She sat with her knees together, slightly
hunched over, her hands around the teacup as if she needed to absorb its warmth.

"As soon as my father had Dr. Schiffer, he handed him over to László Molnar. This
was strictly for security purposes. Both he and Alexsei were terribly afraid of whoever it
was who had kidnapped Dr. Schiffer."
This, too, jibed with what Mylene had told him, Bourne thought. "That day he was
frightened."
He was thinking furiously. "Annaka, for all this to start making sense, you have to
understand that your father's murder was a setup. That sniper was already at the church
when we came in; he knew what your father was up to."
"What do you mean?"
"Your father was shot before he could tell me what I need to know. Someone doesn't
want me to find Dr. Schiffer, and it seems increasingly clear that this is the same
someone who kidnapped Schiffer, who your father and Alex were afraid of."
Annaka's eyes opened wide. "It is possible now that Laszl6 Molnar is in danger."
"Would this mystery man know of your father's involvement with Molnar?"
"My father was extremely careful, very security conscious, so it seems unlikely." She
looked at him, her eyes darkened with fright. "On the other hand, his defenses were
penetrated at Matthias Church."
Bourne nodded his agreement. "Do you know where Molnar lives?"
Annaka drove them to Molnar's apartment, which was in the posh embassy district of
Rozsadomb, or Rose Hill. Budapest showed itself in jumbled buildings of pale stone,
elaborately iced like birthday cakes, carved into ornamental lintels and cornices, quaintly
cobbled streets, wrought-iron balconies with flowerpots, coffeehouses illuminated by
elaborate chandeliers whose lemon light revealed ruddy wood-paneled walls, brilliant
splashes of glass, stained, etched into fin de siecle patterns. Like Paris, it was a city
defined first and foremost by the sinuous river that clove it in two, then by the bridges
that spanned it. Beyond that, it was a city of etched stone, Gothic spires, sweeping public
staircases, lamplit ramparts, copper-encrusted domes, ivied walls, monumental statuary
and glittering mosaics. And when it rained, umbrellas, thousands of umbrellas, unfurled
like sails along the river.
All these things and more affected Bourne deeply. It was for him like arriving at a
place and remembering it from a dream, with a dream's suprareal clarity that stemmed
from its direct connection to the unconscious. And yet he could separate no specific
remembrance from the tide of emotion that arose from his shattered memory.
"What is it?" Annaka said, as if sensing his unease.
"I've been here before," he said. "Remember how I said that the police could be
difficult here?"
She nodded. "You're absolutely right about that. Are you telling me that you don't
know how you know?"
He put his head back against the seat rest. "Years ago I suffered a terrible accident. It
wasn't an accident, really. I was shot on a boat and fell overboard. I almost died of shock,
blood loss and exposure. A doctor in lie de Port Noir in France excised the bullet, took
care of me. I returned to perfect physical health, but my memory was affected. For some

time I had amnesia, and then slowly, painfully, shards of my former life came back to me.
The truth I have to live with is that my memory's never fully recovered and it likely never
will."
Annaka drove on, but by the look on her face he could tell that she had been affected
by his story.
"You can't imagine what it's like not to know who you are," he said. "Unless it's
happened to you, there's no way to know or even to explain what it feels like."
"Unmoored." He glanced at her. "Yes."
"The sea all around you with no sight of land, no sun or moon or stars to tell you which
way you need to go to get back home."
"It's not unlike that." He was surprised. He wanted to ask her how she could know
something like that, but they were pulling into the curb in front of a large, ornate stone
building.
They got out and went into the vestibule. Annaka pressed a button and a low-watt bulb
came on, its sickly illumination revealing the mosaic floor, the wall of bell pushes. László
Molnar's bell remained unanswered.
"It could mean nothing," Annaka said. "More than likely Molnar is with Dr. Schiffer."
Bourne went to the front door, a wide, thick affair with an etched frosted-glass panel
running upward from waist level. "We'll find out in a minute."
He bent over the lock and a moment later he had the door open. Annaka hit another
button and a light came on for thirty seconds as she led the way up the wide curving
staircase to Molnar's second-floor apartment.
Bourne had a bit more difficulty picking this lock, but in the end it gave way. Annaka
was about to rush inside, but he held her back. He drew his ceramic gun, pushed the door
slowly open. Lamps were lit, but it was very quiet. Moving from the living room into the
bedroom to the bathroom, the kitchen, they found the apartment neat as a pin, no
evidence of a struggle and no sign of Molnar.
"What bothers me," Bourne said as he put the gun away, "is the lights being on. He
can't be off with Dr. Schiffer."
"Then he'll be back any time," Annaka said. "We should wait for him."
Bourne nodded. In the living room he picked up several framed photos off the
bookshelves and desk. "Is this Molnar?" he asked Annaka as he pointed to a heavyset
man with a thick mane of slicked-back black hair.
"That's him." She looked around. "My grandparents used to live in this building, and as
a child, I used to play in the halls. The children who lived here knew all sorts of hiding
places."
Bourne ran his fingers over the spines of old-fashioned 331A rpm record sleeves
stacked next to an expensive stereo with an elaborate turntable. "I see he's an opera buff
as well as an audiophile."
Annaka peered in. "No CD player?"
"People like Molnar will tell you that the transfer to digital music takes all the warmth
and subtlety out of a recording."

Bourne turned to the desk, on which sat a notebook computer. He saw that it was
plugged in both to an electrical outlet and to a modem. The screen was black, but when
he touched the chassis it was warm. He pressed the "Escape" key and the screen
immediately sprang to life; the computer had been in "sleep" mode—it had never been
turned off.
Coming up behind him, Annaka looked at the screen, read from it, "Anthrax,
Argentinean hemorrhagic fever, cryptococcosis, pneumonic plague ... God in heaven,
why was Molnar on a Web site that describes the effects of lethal—what does it call
them?—pathogens?"
"All I know is that Dr. Schiffer is the beginning and end to this enigma," Bourne said.
"Alex Conklin approached Dr. Schiffer when he was in DARPA—that's the advanced
weapons program run by the U.S. Department of Defense. Within a year, Dr. Schiffer had
transferred to the CIA's Tactical Non-Lethal Weapons Directorate. Shortly after that, he
vanished altogether. I have no idea what Schiffer was working on that interested Conklin
so much that he would go to the trouble of pissing off the DOD and vanishing a
prominent government scientist from the Agency's program."
"Maybe Dr. Schiffer is a bacteriologist or an epidemiologist." Annaka shivered. "The
information on this Web site is terrifying."
She went into the kitchen to get a glass of water while Bourne navigated around the
Web page to see if he could get any further clue as to why Molnar would be on this site.
Finding nothing, he went to the top of the browser, where he accessed a drop-down menu
next to the "Address" bar that showed the most recent sites Molnar had been on. He
clicked on the last one Molnar had accessed. It turned out to be a real-time scientific
forum. Navigating to the "Archives" section, he went back in time to see if he could find
out when Molnar had used the forum and what he'd talked about. Approximately fortyeight hours ago, László 1647M had logged onto the forum. Bourne, his heart beating fast,
spent several minutes reading the dialogue he had had with another forum member.
"Annaka, look at this," he called. "It seems Dr. Schiffer is neither a bacteriologist nor
an epidemiologist. He's an expert in bacteriological particu-late behavior."
"Mr. Bourne, you'd better come here," Annaka replied. "Right now."
The tightness in her voice brought him into the kitchen at the run. She was standing in
front of the sink as if held spellbound. A glass of water was suspended halfway to her lips.
She seemed pale, and when she saw him, she licked her lips nervously.
"What is it?"
She pointed to a space between the counter and the refrigerator, where he saw neatly
stacked seven or eight white-coated wire racks.
"What the hell are those?" he said.
"They're the refrigerator shelves," Annaka said. "Someone took them out." She turned
to him. "Why would they do that?"
"Maybe Molnar's getting a new refrigerator."
"This one is new."
He checked behind the refrigerator. "It's plugged in and the compressor seems to be
running normally. You didn't look inside?"

"No."
He grabbed hold of the handle, opened the door. Annaka gasped.
"Christ," he said.
A pair of death-clouded eyes stared sightlessly out at them. There in the depths of the
shelfless refrigerator was the curled-up, blue-white body of László Molnar.

CHAPTER FIFTEEN
The seesaw wail of sirens brought them out of their shock. Racing to the front window,
Bourne looked down onto Rose Hill, saw five or six white Opal Astras and Skoda
Felicias drawing up, blue-and-white lights flashing. The officers inside tumbled out,
making directly for Molnar's building. He had been set up again! The scene was so
similar to what had happened at Conklin's house that he knew the same person must be
behind both incidents. This was important because it told him two things: First, he and
Annaka were being watched. By whom, Khan? He didn't think so. Khan's methodology
was increasingly confrontational. Second, Khan may have been telling the truth when he
claimed he wasn't responsible for the murders of Alex and Mo. Right now, Bourne
couldn't think of a reason why he'd lie about that. That left the unknown person who'd
called the police at Conklin's estate. Was the person he was working for based in
Budapest? There was a convincing logic to it. Conklin was on his way to Budapest when
he was murdered. Dr. Schiffer had been in Budapest, along with Janos Vadas and László
Molnar. Every road led back to this city.
Even as his mind raced through these thoughts, he was yelling to Annaka to wipe off
and put away the water glass, wipe down the kitchen faucet. He grabbed Molnar's laptop,
wiped down the stereo and the knob on the front door, and they sprinted out of the
apartment.
Already, they could hear the police pounding up the stairs. The elevator would be filled
with police and so was out of the question.
"They've left us no choice," Bourne said as they mounted the stairs. "We have to go
up."
"But why have they come now?" Annaka asked. "How could they have known we
were here?"
"They couldn't," Bourne said, continuing to lead her upward, "unless we were under
surveillance." He didn't like the position the police were putting them in. He recalled all
too well the fate of the sniper at Matthias Church. When you went up, all too often you
came down, hard.
They were a floor from the roof when Annaka tugged on his hand and whispered,
"This'way!"
She led him into the corridor. Behind them, the stairwell resounded with the noises any
group of men would make, especially one on its way to apprehend a heinous murderer.
Three-quarters of the way down the corridor was a door that looked like an emergency
exit. Annaka pulled it open. They were in a short hallway, not more than ten feet long, at

the end of which was another door, this one made of battered metal plates. Bourne went
ahead of her.
He saw that the door was bolted at top and bottom. He slid the slides back, pulled it
open. There was only a brick wall, cold as a grave.
"Would you look at that!" Detective Csilla said, ignoring the new recruit who had
vomited all over his polished shoes. The academy certainly wasn't turning them out the
way they used to, he mused as he studied the victim, curled stiff in his own refrigerator.
"No one in the apartment," one of his officers said.
"Dust it anyway," Detective Csilla said. He was a burly, blond-haired man with a
broken nose and intelligent eyes. "I doubt the perpetrator was stupid enough to leave his
prints, but you never know," he said now. Then he pointed. "Look at those burn marks,
would you? And the puncture wounds seem to go very deep."
"Tortured," his sergeant, a slim-hipped young man, said, "by a professional."
"This one's more than a professional," Detective Csilla said, leaning in and sniffing as
if the corpse were a side of meat he suspected of having begun to rot. "He enjoys his
work."
"The phone tip said the murderer was here in the apartment."
Detective Csilla looked up. "If not the apartment, then surely the building." He backed
away as the forensic team arrived with their kits and flash cameras. "Have the men fan
out."
"Already done," his sergeant said in a subtle reminder to his boss that he didn't want to
remain a sergeant forever.
"Enough time with the dead," Detective Csilla said. "Let's join them."
As they went down the hallway, the sergeant explained that the elevator had already
been secured, as had the floors below. "The murderer has only one way to go."
"Get the sharpshooters onto the roof," Detective Scilla said.
"Already there," his sergeant replied. "I put them into the elevator when we entered the
building."
Csilla nodded. "How many floors above us? Three?"
"Yessir."
Csilla mounted the stairs two at a time. "With the roof secured, we can afford to take
our time."
It did not take them long to find the doorway to the short corridor.
"Where does this lead?" Csilla asked.
"I don't know, sir," his sergeant said, irked that he couldn't provide an answer.
As the two men approached the far end of the corridor, they saw the battered metal
door. "That's this?" Csilla took a look at it. "Bolts at top and bottom." He leaned in, saw
the gleam of metal. "They've been recently pulled." He drew his gun, pulled the door
open onto the bricked-up wall.
"Looks like our murderer was as frustrated as we are."

Csilla was staring at the brickwork, trying to discern if any of it was new. Then he put
a hand out, tested one brick after another. The sixth one he touched moved just slightly.
Aware that his sergeant was about to exclaim, he clamped a hand across his mouth, gave
him a warning look. Then he whispered in his ear, "Take three of the men and canvass
the building next door."
At first, Bourne, his ears straining to catch the slightest sound in the pitch blackness,
thought the noise was one of the rats with whom they were sharing this dank and
uncomfortable space between the walls of Molnar's building and the adjacent one. Then it
came again, and he knew it for what it was: the scrape of brick against mortar.
"They've found our hiding place," he whispered as he grabbed hold of Annaka. 'We've
got to move."
The space they occupied was narrow, not more than two feet in width, but it seemed to
rise indefinitely into the darkness above their heads. They stood on a floor of sorts, made
up of metal pipes. It was not the most secure of floors and Bourne did not care to think
about the open space below them into which they would plunge should one or more of
the pipes give way. "Do you know a way out of here?" Bourne whispered. "I think so,"
she said.
She turned to their right, felt her way along the space with the palms of her hands on
the wall of the adjacent building.
She tripped once, righted herself. "It's here somewhere," she muttered. They continued
onward, putting one foot in front of the other. Then, all at once, a pipe gave way beneath
Bourne's weight and his left leg plunged downward. He canted wildly over, his shoulder
striking the wall, and Mol-nar's laptop was thrown from his grip. He tried to catch it even
as Annaka was reaching down to grab him, pull him up. Instead, he saw it strike a pipe on
edge, then plunge through the gap the rotten pipe had made, lost forever.
"Are you okay?" Annaka said as he regained his feet. "I'm fine," he said grimly, "but
Molnar's laptop's gone." A moment later he froze. Behind them, he could hear movement,
slow and stealthy—someone else was breathing in the space—and he took out his
flashlight, his thumb on the slide switch. He put his lips against An-naka's ear, "He's here
with us. No more talking." He could sense her nod, even as he smelled the scent of her
rising off her bare skin, citrus and musk. Something clanked behind them as the
policeman's shoe struck a protrusion of solder where two pipes joined. All of them stood
very still. Bourne's heart beat fast. Then Annaka's hand found his, guided it along the
wall where a line of grout was missing or had been deliberately gouged away.
But another problem presented itself. As soon as they pushed in the section of wall, the
policeman behind them would see the pale patch of light, however feeble, coming in from
the other side. He would see them, know where they were going. Bourne took a chance,
put his lips against Annaka's ear and whispered, "You must tell me the moment before
you push through the wall."
She squeezed his hand in response, kept hold of it. When he felt her squeeze it again,
he aimed the flashlight directly behind them, snapped on the beam. The burst of glaring
light temporarily blinded their pursuer, and Bourne lent his energy to helping her push
through the three-foot-by-three-foot section of the wall.

Annaka ducked through while Bourne kept the beam focused on their adversary, but he
felt the pipes vibrate under the soles of his boots and an instant later he was struck a
terrific blow.
Detective Csilla tried to fight off the light-dazzle. He had been caught totally
unprepared, a fact that enraged him, as he prided himself on being prepared for every
possibility. He shook his head, but it was no good—the beam of light had temporarily
rendered him blind. If he maintained his ground until the light was turned off, he had no
doubt the murderer would have already fled. So he used his own advantage of surprise
and attacked even though he was blinded. With a grunt of effort, he rushed along the
pipes, crashing into the perpetrator, his head down in a street fighter's crouch.
In such close quarters and in the dark, eyesight was of little value, and he proceeded to
use his fists, the edges of his hands and the heels of his stout shoes precisely as he had
been taught in the academy. He was a man who believed in discipline, in rigor and in the
power of advantage. He knew the moment he launched himself that the murderer would
never have suspected him of attacking blind, and so he rained down as many blows as he
could on the other in as short a space of time as he could manage in order to make the
most of the advantage of surprise.
But the man was strong and solidly built. Worse, he was an accomplished hand-tohand fighter, and almost immediately Csilla knew that in a prolonged fight he would be
defeated. He sought, therefore, to end the combat swiftly and surely. In doing so, he made
the fatal error of exposing the side of his neck. He felt the surprise of the pressure but no
pain. He was already unconscious as his legs buckled under him.
Bourne went through the hole in the wall, helped Annaka slide the square of bricks
back into place.
"What happened to you?" she said a little breathlessly.
"A policeman was smarter than he ought to have been."
They were in another short brick-lined utility corridor. Through a door was the hallway
of the building next door to Molnar's, warm light emanating from etched-glass sconces
along the flowered-paper walls. Here and there were scattered dark wooden benches.
Annaka had already punched the button for the elevator, but when it rose to their level,
Bourne could see through the cage two policemen with their guns drawn.
"Oh, hell!" he said, grabbing Annaka's hand and dragging her to the stairwell. But he
heard the heavy tread of footsteps and knew that egress was denied them as well. Behind
them, the two policemen had opened the elevator cab gates, were in the hallway, racing
toward them. Bourne took her up one flight. In the hallway he quickly picked the lock of
the first door they came to, closing the door before the police followed them up the stairs.
Inside, the apartment was dark and still. Whether anyone was home was impossible to
say. Crossing to the side window, Bourne opened it, looked out at a stone ledge that
overlooked a narrow alley housing a pair of huge green metal trash bins. Illumination
came from a streetlamp on Endrodi Street. Three windows over, a fire escape led
downward to the alley which, as far as Bourne could see, was deserted.
"Come on," he said, climbing out onto the ledge.

Annaka's eyes opened wide. "Are you crazy?"
"Do you want to get caught?" He looked at her levelly. "This is our only way out."
She swallowed uneasily. "I'm afraid of heights."
"We're not that far up." He held out a hand, waggled his fingers. "Come on, there's no
time to lose."
Taking a deep breath, she climbed out and he closed the window behind her. She
turned and, glancing down, would have fallen if Bourne hadn't grabbed her, pulled her
back against the stone side of the building. "Jesus Christ, you said we weren't that far
up!"
"For me, that's true."
She bit her lip. "I'll kill you for this."
"You've already tried." He squeezed her hand. "Just follow me and you'll be fine, I
promise."
They moved to the end of the ledge. He didn't want to push her, but there was good
cause for haste. With the police swarming all through the building, it was only a matter of
time until they came around to this alley.
"You'll have to let go of my hand now," he said, and then, because he saw what she
was about to do, he added sharply enough to arrest her, "Don't look down! If you feel
yourself getting dizzy, look at the side of the building, concentrate on something small,
the carving of the stonework, whatever. Keep your mind occupied with that and your fear
will fade."
She nodded, let go of his hand, and he stepped out, bridging the gap between ledges.
His right hand gripped the top of the ledge above the next window and he transferred his
weight from his left side to his right side. Lifting his left leg off the ledge on which
Annaka was still standing, he moved smoothly across to the next ledge. Then he turned
and smiled, held his hand out to her.
"Now you."
"No." She shook her head violently from side to side. All the color had drained from
her face. "I can't do it."
"Yes, you can." He waggled his fingers again. "Come on, Annaka, take the first step;
after that, the rest is easy. You simply shift your weight from left to right."
She shook her head mutely.
He continued to smile, showing none of the rising anxiety he felt. Here on the side of
the building, they were completely vulnerable. If the police should come into the alley
now, they were dead. He had to get them to the fire escape and do it fast. "One leg,
Annaka, reach out with your right leg."
"Christ!" She was at the end of the ledge, where he had been moments before. "What if
I fall?"
"You won't fall."
"But what—"
"I'll catch you." His smile broadened. "It's time to move now."

She did as he bade, moving her right leg out and across. He showed her how to grasp
the ledge above with her right hand. This she did without hestitation.
"Now shift your weight, left to right, and step across."
"I'm frozen."
She was about to look down and he knew it. "Close your eyes," he said. "Do you feel
my hand on yours?" She nodded, as if terrified that the vibration of her voicebox would
send her spinning down into the void below. "Shift your weight, Annaka. Just shift it left
to right. Good, now lift your left leg and step—"
"XT »
No.
He put his hand around her waist. "All right, then, just lift your left leg." As soon as
she did, he pulled her, quickly and rather violently, against him onto the next ledge. She
fell against him, shivering with fear and the release of tension.
Only two more to go. He moved them to the far end of the ledge, repeated the process.
The quicker they got this over with, the better for both of them. She managed the second
and third crossings somewhat better, either by sheer nerve or by shutting down her mind
completely, following his orders without thinking.
At last, they made it onto the fire escape and began their descent to the street. The
lamplight from Endrodi Street spilled long shadows down the alley. Bourne longed to kill
it with a shot from his gun, but he didn't dare. Instead, he hurried them onward.
They were one tier from the vertical extending ladder that would take them to within
two feet of the cobbles of the alley when out of the corner of his eye Bourne saw the
quality of the light change. Shadows moved in the alley from opposing directions; a pair
of policemen had entered the alley from either side.
Csilla's sergeant had taken one of their officers out of the building the moment the
perpetrator had been spotted. He already knew that he was clever enough to have found
his way from building to building. Having successfully escaped from László Molnar's
apartment, he didn't now consider that the criminal would allow himself to get trapped in
the adjacent building's stairway. That meant he'd find a way out, and the sergeant wanted
all bases covered. He had a man on the roof, one each at the front and service entrances.
That left the alleyway on the side. He didn't see how the murderer would get to the alley,
but he wasn't taking any chances.
Lucky for him, he saw the figure outlined against the fire escape as he turned the
building corner and entered the alley. By the light of the street-lamp on Endrodi Street he
saw his officer enter the alley from the opposite end. He signed upward to the man,
indicating the figure on the fire escape. He had drawn his gun and was steadily advancing
toward the vertical ladder that led down from the fire escape when the figure moved,
seemed to pull apart as if dividing. The sergeant started in surprise. There were two
figures on the fire escape!
He raised his gun and fired. Sparks flew off the metal, and he saw one of the figures
launch itself into the air, rolling into a ball only to disappear between the two enormous
Dumpsters. The officer broke into a run, but the sergeant held back. He saw his officer

reach the corner of the Dumpster nearest him, go into a crouch as he approached the
space between the two.
The sergeant looked up for the second figure. The feeble illumination made it difficult
to pick out details, but he saw no one standing. The fire escape looked clear. Where could
the seond one have gone?
He returned his attention to his officer, only to find that the man had vanished. He took
several steps forward, called out his name. No response. He pulled out his walkie-talkie,
was about to call for reinforcements when something dropped onto him. He stumbled,
fell heavily, got up on one knee, shaking his head. Then something emerged from the
space between the Dumpsters. By the time he realized that it wasn't his officer, he had
been dealt a blow hard enough to cause him to lose consciousness.
"That was really stupid," Bourne said, stooping to help Annaka up off cobbles of the
alley.
"You're welcome," she said, shaking off his hand, standing on her own power.
"I thought you were afraid of heights."
"I'm afraid of dying more," she shot back.
"Let's get out of here before more policemen show up," he said. "I think you ought to
lead the way."
The streetlight was in Khan's eyes as Bourne and Annaka ran out of the alley.
Although he couldn't see their faces, he recognized Bourne by his shape and his gait. As
for his female companion, though his mind registered her in a peripheral way, he did not
give her much attention. He, like Bourne, was far more interested in why the police had
been drawn to László Molnar's apartment when Bourne had been there. Also, like Bourne,
he was struck by the similarity of this scenario to the one at Conklin's estate in Manassas.
It had Spalko's thumbprint all over it. The trouble was that unlike in Manassas when he
had spotted Spalko's man, he had come across no such person during his thorough recon
of the four square blocks around Molnar's apartment building. So who had called the
police? Someone had to have been on the scene to tip them off when Bourne and the
woman had entered the building.
He started up his rental car and was able to follow Bourne as he got into a taxi. The
female continued on. Khan, knowing Bourne, was prepared for the backtracking, the
reversal of direction, the changing taxis, and so was able to keep Bourne in sight during
the maneuvers meant to shake any tails.
At last Bourne's taxi reached Fo utca. Four blocks north of the magnificent domes of
the Kiraly Baths, Bourne stepped out of the taxi and went into the building at 106-108.
Khan slowed his car, pulled it into the curb up the block and across the street—he
didn't want to pass by the entrance. He turned off the engine, sank into darkness. Alex
Conklin, Jason Bourne, László Molnar, Hasan Ar-senov. He thought about Spalko and
wondered how all these disparate names were connected. There was a line of logic here,
there always was, if only he could see it.
In this manner, five or six minutes passed and then another taxi pulled up in front of
the entrance to 106-108. Khan watched a young female get out. He strained to catch a
glimpse of her face before she pushed through the heavy front doors, but all he was able

to determine was that she had red hair. He waited, watching the facade of the building.
No light had gone on after Bourne had entered the lobby, which meant that he must be
waiting for the woman—that this was her apartment. Sure enough, within three minutes,
lights went on in the fourth—and top—floor bay window.
Now that he knew where they were, he commenced to sink into zazen, but after an
hour of fruitlessly trying to clear his mind, he gave up. In the darkness, his hand closed
around the small carved stone Buddha. Almost immediately thereafter, he fell into a deep
sleep, from which he dropped like a stone into the nether world of his recurring
nightmare.
The water is blue-black, swirling restlessly as if alive with malignant energy. He tries
to strike out for the surface, stretching up so hard his bones crack with the strain. Still, he
continues to sink into the darkness, dragged down by the rope tied around his ankle. His
lungs are beginning to burn. He longs to take a breath, but he knows that the moment he
opens his mouth, the water will rush in and he'll drown.
He reaches down, trying to untie the rope, but his fingers fail to gain a grip on the slick
surface. He feels, like an electric current running through him, the terror of whatever
waits for him in the darkness. The terror presses in on him like a vise; he forces down an
urge to gibber. In that moment he hears the sound rising from the depths—the clangor of
bells, of massed monks chanting before they are slaughtered by the Khmer Rouge.
Eventually, the sound resolves itself into the song of a single voice, a clear tenor, a
repeated ululation not unlike a prayer.
And it is as he stares down into the darkness, as he begins to make out the shape
tethered to the other rope, the thing that is dragging him inexorably to his doom, that he
feels the song he is hearing must be coming from that figure. For he knows the figure
twirling in the powerful current below him; it's as familiar to him as his own face, his
own body. But now, with a shock that pierces him to the quick, he realizes that the sound
isn't coming from the familiar form below him because it's dead, which is why its weight
is dragging him down to his doom.
The sound is nearer to hand, and now he recognizes the ululation as that of a clear
tenor—his own voice coming from deep inside himself. It touches every part of him at
once.
"Lee-Lee! Lee-Lee!" he is calling just before he drowns....

CHAPTER SIXTEEN
Spalko and Zina arrived in Crete before the sun, touching down in Kazantzakis Airport
just outside Iraklion. They were accompanied by a surgeon and three men, whom Zina
had taken the time to scrutinize during the flight. They were not particularly big men, if
only to ensure that they wouldn't stand out in a crowd. Spalko's heightened sense of
security dictated that when, as now, he was engaged not as Stepan Spalko, president of
Humanistas, Ltd., but as the Shaykh, he maintain the lowest of profiles, not only for
himself but for all of his personnel. It was in their motionless-ness that Zina recognized
their power, for they had absolute control over their bodies, and when they moved, they

did so with the fluidity and surety of dancers or yoga masters. She could see the intent in
their dark eyes, which came only after years of hard training. Even when they were
smiling deferentially at her, she could sense the danger that lurked within them, coiled,
waiting patiently for its moment of release.
Crete, the largest island in the Mediterranean, was the gateway between Europe and
Africa. For centuries it had lain baking in the hot Mediterranean sun, its southern eye
trained on Alexandria in Egypt and Banghazi in Libya. Inevitably, however, an island so
blessed in location was also surrounded by predators. At the crossroads of cultures, its
history was by necessity bloody. Like waves breaking on the shore, invaders from
different lands washed up on Crete's coves and beaches, bringing with them their culture,
language, architecture and religion.
Iraklion had been founded by the Saracens in a.d. 824. They had called it Chandax, a
bastardization of the Arabic word kandak, owing to the moat they dug around it. The
Saracens ruled for one hundred forty years, before the Byzantines wrested control away
from them. But the pirates were so as-toundingly successful that it had taken three
hundred boats to carry away all of their amassed booty to Byzantium.
During the Venetian occupation, the city was known as Candia. Under the Venetians, it
became the most important cultural center in the Eastern Mediterranean. All of that came
to an end with the first Turkish invasion.
This polyglot history was everywhere one looked: in Iraklion's massive Venetian
fortress that protected its beautiful harbor from invasion; the town hall, housed in the
Venetian Loggia; the "Koubes," the Turkish fountain near the former church of the
Savior, which the Turks converted into the Valide mosque.
But in the modern, bustling city itself, there remained nothing of Mi-noan culture, the
first and, from an archaeological point of view, the most important Cretan civilization. To
be sure, the remnants of the palace of Knossos could be seen outside the city proper, but
it was for historians to note that the Saracens had chosen this spot to found Chandax
because it had been the main port of the Minoans thousands of years earlier.
At heart, Crete remained an island shrouded in myth, and it was impossible to set foot
on it without being reminded of the legend of its birth. Centuries before the Saracens, the
Venetians or the Turks existed, Crete had come to prominence from out of the mists of
legend. Minos, Crete's first king, was a demigod. His father, Zeus, taking the form of a
bull, raped his mother, Europa, and so from the first, the bull became the signifier of the
island.
Minos and his two brothers battled for the rule of Crete, but Minos prayed to Poseidon,
promising eternal obeisance to the god of the sea if he would use his power to help Minos
defeat his brothers. Poseidon heard the prayer and from the churning sea rose a snowwhite bull. This animal was meant as a sacrifice for Minos to pledge his subservience to
Poseidon, but the greedy king coveted the bull and kept it for himself. Enraged, Poseidon
caused Minos' wife to fall in love with it. In secret, she engaged Daedalus, Minos'
favorite architect, to build her a hollow cow out of wood in which she hid so that the bull
would mate with her. The issue of that sexual congress was the Minotaur—a monstrous
man with a bull's head and tail— whose savagery wreaked so much havoc on the island
that Minos had Daedalus build an enormous labyrinth, so elaborate that the captured
Minotaur could never escape from it.

This legend was much in Stepan Spalko's mind as he and his team drove up the city's
steep streets, for he had an affinity for Greek myths—their emphasis on rape and incest,
bloodletting and hubris. He saw aspects of himself in many of them, so it was not
difficult for him to believe himself a demigod.
Like many Mediterranean island towns, Iraklion was built on the side of a mountain,
its stone houses rising up the steep streets mercifully plied by taxis and buses. In fact, the
entire spine of the island rose in a chain known as the White Mountains.
The address Spalko had obtained by interrogation from Laszl6 Molnar was a house
perhaps halfway up the city slope. It belonged to an architect by the name of Istos
Daedalika, who, as it turned out, was as mythical as his ancient namesake. Spalko's team
had determined that the house had been leased by a company associated with László
Molnar. They arrived at the address just as the night sky was about to be split open like
the hull of a nut, revealing the bloody Mediterranean sun.
After a brief reconnoiter, they all donned tiny headphones, connecting themselves
electronically over a wireless network. They checked their weapons, high-powered
composite crossbows, excellent for the silence they needed to keep. Spalko synchronized
his watch with two of his men, then sent them around to the rear entrance while he and
Zina approached the front entrance. The remaining member of the team was ordered to
keep watch and warn them of any suspect activity on the street or, alternatively, the
approach of the police.
The street was deserted and quiet; no one was stirring. There were no lights on in the
house, but Spalko didn't expect there to be any. He glanced at his watch, counting into his
microphone as the second hand swept toward sixty.
Inside the house, the mercenaries were astir. It was moving day, the last few hours
before they would depart as the others had before them. They moved Dr. Schiffer to a
different location on Crete every three days; they did it quickly and quietly, the
destination being decided upon only at the last minute. Such security measures required
that some of them stay behind to ensure every last vestige of their presence was either
taken or destroyed.
At this moment, the mercenaries were dispersed throughout the house. One of them
was in the kitchen making thick Turkish coffee, a second was in the bathroom, a third had
turned on the satellite TV. He watched the screen disinterestedly for a moment, then went
to the front window, pulled aside the curtain, peered out into the street. Everything
appeared normal. He stretched like a cat, bending his body this way and that. Then,
strapping on his shoulder holster, he went to perform his morning perimeter check.
He unlocked the front door, pulled it open and was promptly shot through the heart by
Spalko. He pitched backward, his arms splayed, his eyes rolling upward in their sockets,
and was dead before he struck the floor.
Spalko and Zina entered the vestibule at the same moment his men crashed through the
back door. The mercenary in the kitchen dropped his coffee cup, drew his weapon and
wounded one of Spalko's men before he, too, was shot dead.
Nodding to Zina, Spalko took the stairs three at a time.

Zina had reacted to the shots coming through the bathroom door by ordering one of
Spalko's men out the back door. She ordered another of Spalko's team to break down the
door. This he did quickly and efficiently. No gunfire greeted them as they burst into the
bathroom. Instead, they saw the window out which the mercenary had crawled. Zina had
anticipated this possibility, hence her sending a man out the back.
A moment later she heard the telltale thwok! of the bolt being loosed, followed by a
heavy grunt.
Upstairs, Spalko went from room to room in a crouch. The first bedroom was empty
and he moved to the second. As he passed the bed, he caught a movement in the wall
mirror above the dresser to his left. Something moved under the bed. At once, he dropped
to his knees, shot the bolt. It passed through the dust ruffle and the bed was lifted off its
feet. A body thrashed and groaned.
On his knees, Spalko fitted another bolt in his crossbow, began to aim it when he was
bowled over. Something hard hit his head, a bullet ricocheted and he felt a weight on him.
At once he let go of the crossbow, drew out a hunting knife and stabbed upward into his
attacker. When it was buried to the hilt, he turned it, gritting his teeth with the effort, and
was rewarded with a heavy gout of blood.
With a grunt, he threw the mercenary off him, retrieved his knife, wiped the blade
down on the dust ruffle. Then he shot the second bolt down through the bed. Mattress
stuffing flew through the air and the thrashing came to an abrupt halt.
He came back downstairs, after having checked the remaining second-floor rooms, into
a living room reeking of cordite. One of his men was entering the open back door with
the last remaining mercenary, whom he had seriously wounded. The entire assault had
lasted less than three minutes, which suited Spalko's design; the less attention they
brought to the house, the better.
There was no trace of Dr. Felix Schiffer. And yet Spalko knew that Las-z!6 Molnar
hadn't lied to him. These men were part of the mercenary contingent Molnar had hired
when he and Conklin had engineered Schiffer's escape.
"What's the final disposition?" he asked his men.
"Marco is wounded. Nothing major, the bullet went in and out the flesh of his left
arm," one of them said. "Two opposition dead, one seriously wounded."
Spalko nodded. "And two dead upstairs."
Flicking the snout of his machine pistol at the last remaining mercenary, the man
added, "This one won't last long unless he gets treatment."
Spalko looked at Zina, nodded. She approached the wounded man and, kneeling,
turned him over on his back. He groaned and blood leaked out of him.
"What's your name?" she said in Hungarian.
He looked at her, with eyes darkened by pain and knowledge of his own impending
death.
She took out a small box of wooden matches. "What's your name?" she repeated, this
time in Greek.
When there was no reply forthcoming, she said to Spalko's men, "Hold him still."

Two of them bent to comply. The mercenary struggled briefly, then was still. He stared
up at her with equanimity; he was a professional soldier, after all.
She struck the match. A sharp smell of sulphur accompanied the flare of the flame.
With her thumb and forefinger, she pried apart the lids of one eye, brought the flame
down toward the exposed eyeball.
The mercenary's free eye blinked maniacally and his breathing became stertorous. The
flame, reflected in the curve of his glistening orb, moved ever closer. He felt fear, Zina
could see that, but beneath that there was a sense of disbelief. He simply did not believe
that she would follow through with her implied threat. A pity, but it made no difference
to her.
The mercenary screamed, his body arching up despite the men's efforts to hold him
down. He writhed and howled even after the match, guttering, fell smoking onto his chest.
His good eyeball rolled around in its socket as if trying to find a safe haven.
Zina calmly lit another match, and all at once the mercenary vomited. Zina wasn't
deterred. It was vital now that he understand that there was only one response that would
stop her. He wasn't stupid; he knew what it was. Also, no amount of money was worth
this torture. Through the tearing of his good eye, she could see his capitulation. Still, she
wouldn't let him up, not until he'd told her where they had taken Schiffer.
Behind her, observing the scene from start to finish, Stepan Spalko was impressed
despite himself. He'd had no clear idea of how Zina would react when he gave her the
assignment of interrogation. In a way, it was a test; but it was more—it was a way to get
to know her in the intimate fashion he found so pleasurable.
Because he was a man who used words every day of his life in order to manipulate
people and events, Spalko had an innate distrust of them. People lied, it was as simple as
that. Some liked to lie for the effect it had; others lied without knowing it, in order to
protect themselves from scrutiny; still others lied to themselves. It was only in action, in
what people did, especially in extreme circumstances or under duress, that their true
natures were revealed. There was no possibility of lying then; you could safely believe
the evidence arrayed before you.
Now he knew a truth about Zina he hadn't before. He doubted whether Hasan Arsenov
knew it, whether he'd even believe it if told. At her core Zina was hard as a rock; she was
tougher than Arsenov himself. Watching her now extracting the information from the
hapless mercenary, he knew that she could live without Arsenov, though Arsenov
couldn't live without her.
Bourne awoke to the sound of practice arpeggios and the aromatic smell of coffee. For
a moment he hung between sleep and consciousness. He was aware that he was lying on
Annaka Vadas' sofa, that he had an eiderdown comforter over him and a goose feather
pillow beneath his head. At once he rose fully out of sleep into Annaka's sun-drenched
apartment. He turned, saw her sitting at the gleaming grand piano, a huge cup of coffee
by her side.
"What time is it?"
She continued her chord runs without picking up her head. "After noon." "Christ!"

"Yes, it was time for my practice, time you got up." She began to play a melody he
couldn't place. "I actually thought you'd have gone back to your hotel by the time I awoke,
but I came in here and there you were, sleeping like a child. So I went and made coffee.
Would you like some?" "Absolutely." "You know where it is."
She picked up her head then, refused to turn away, watched him as he peeled off the
eiderdown, drew on his cords and shirt. He padded into the bathroom, and when he was
finished, he went into the kitchen. As he was pouring himself coffee, she said, "You have
a nice body, scarred though it is." He searched for cream; apparently she liked her coffee
black. "The scars give me character."
"Even the one around your neck?"
Poking through the refrigerator, he didn't answer her but, rather, involuntarily put a
hand to the wound, and in so doing felt again Mylene Dutronc's compassionate
ministrations.
"That one's new," she said. "What happened?" "I had an encounter with a very large,
very angry creature." She stirred, abruptly uneasy. "Who tried to strangle you?" He had
found the cream. He poured in a dollop, then two teaspoonfuls of sugar, took his first sip.
Returning to the living room, he said, "Anger can do that to you, or didn't you know?"
"How would I? I'm not a part of your violent world." He looked at her levelly. "You
tried to shoot me, or have you forgotten?" "I don't forget anything," she said shortly.
Something he'd said had chafed her, but he didn't know what it was. Part of her was
frayed thin. Perhaps it was only the shock of her father's sudden and violent death.
In any case he decided to try another tack. "There's nothing edible in your refrigerator."
"I usually go out to eat. There's a sweet cafe" five blocks away." "Do you think we
could go there?" he said. "I'm starving." "As soon as I'm finished. Our late night delayed
my day." The piano bench scraped the floor as she settled herself more fully. Then the
first bars of Chopin's Nocturne in B-Flat Minor drifted through the room, swirling like
leaves falling on a golden autumn afternoon. He was surprised at how much pleasure the
music gave him.
After some moments, he got up, went to the small escritoire and opened her computer.
"Please don't do that," Annaka said without taking her eyes from the music sheet. "It's
distracting."
Bourne sat, trying to relax, while the gorgeous music swept through the apartment.
While the last of the Nocturne was still echoing, Annaka rose, went into the kitchen.
He heard the water in the sink running while she waited for it to get cold. It seemed to run
for a long time. She returned then, with a glass of water in one hand, which she drank
down in a single long swallow. Bourne, watching her from his position at the escritoire,
saw the curve of her pale neck, the curl of several stray strands, a fiery copper, at her
hairline.
"You did very well last night," Bourne said.
"Thank you for talking me down from the ledge." Her eyes slid away, as if she didn't
want any part of his compliment. "I was never so frightened in my life."

They were in the cafe, which was filled with cut-glass chandeliers, velvet-seat cushions
and translucent wall sconces affixed to cherrywood walls. They sat across from each
other at a window table, overlooking the outdoor portion of the cafe, which was deserted,
it being still too chilly to sit in the pale morning sun.
"My concern now is that Molnar's apartment was under surveillance," Bourne said.
"There's no other explanation for the police arriving at just that time."
"But why would anyone be watching the apartment?"
"To see if we showed up. Ever since I've arrived in Budapest, my inquiries have been
frustrated."
Annaka glanced nervously out the window. "What about now? The thought of
someone watching my apartment—watching us—gives me the creeps."
"No one followed us here from your apartment, I made sure of that." He paused while
their food was served. When the waiter had departed, he resumed. "Remember the
precautions I made us take last night after we escaped the police? We took separate taxis,
changed twice, reversed direction."
She nodded. "I was too exhausted then to question your bizarre instructions."
"No one knows where we went or even that we're together now."
"Well, that's a relief." She released a long-held breath.
Khan had just one thought when he saw Bourne and the woman walk out of her
building: Despite Spalko's cocky assurances that he was safe from Bourne's search,
Bourne was continuing to circle closer. Somehow Bourne had found out about László
Molnar, the man Spalko was interested in. Furthermore, he'd discovered where Molnar
lived and, presumably, he'd been inside the apartment when the police showed up. Why
was Molnar important to Bourne? Khan had to find out.
He watched from behind as Bourne and the woman walked off. Then he got out of his
rental car, went into the entrance of 106-108 Fo utca. He picked the lock on the lobby
door and entered the hallway inside. Taking the elevator up to the top floor, he found the
staircase up to the roof. Unsurprisingly, the door was alarmed, but for him it was a simple
matter to jump the circuit, bypassing the alarm system altogether. He went through the
door, onto the roof, crossing immediately to the front of the building.
With his hands on the stone parapet, he leaned over, saw immediately the bay window
on the fourth floor just below him. Climbing over the parapet, he eased himself down
onto the ledge beneath the window. The first window he tried was locked, but the other
wasn't. He opened the window, climbed through into the apartment.
He would dearly have liked to look around, but without knowing how soon they would
return, he knew he couldn't risk it. This was a time for business, not indulgences. Looking
around for a likely spot, he glanced up at the frosted-glass light fixture hanging from the
center of the ceiling. It was as good as any, he quickly determined, and better than most.
Dragging over the piano bench, he positioned it beneath the fixture, then climbed on it.
He took out the miniature electronic bug, dropped it over the rim of the frosted-glass
bowl. Then he climbed down, put an electronic ear-bud into his ear and activated the bug.

He heard the small noises as he moved the piano bench back into place, heard his own
footfalls across the polished wooden floor as he went over to the sofa, where a pillow and
down comforter lay. He took up the pillow, sniffed its center. He smelled Bourne, but the
scent stirred a previously undisturbed memory. As it began to rise upward in his mind, he
dropped the pillow as if it had burst into flame. Quickly now, he exited the apartment as
he had come, retracing his steps down to the lobby. But this time he went back through
the building, going out the service entrance. One could never be too careful.
Annaka began work on her breakfast. Sunlight streamed in through the window,
illuminating her extraordinary fingers. She ate like she played, handling the cutlery as if
they were musical instruments.
"Where did you learn to play piano like that?" he said.
"Did you like it?"
"Yes, very much."
"Why?"
He cocked his head. "Why?"
She nodded. "Yes, why did you like it? What did you hear in it?"
Bourne thought a moment. "A kind of mournfulness, I suppose."
She put down her knife and fork and, with her hands free, began to sing a section of the
Nocturne. "It's the unresolved dominant sevenths, you see. With them, Chopin expanded
the accepted limits of dissonance and key." She resumed singing, the notes ringing out.
"The result is expansive. And at the same time mournful, because of those unresolved
dominant sevenths."
She paused, her beautiful pale hands hanging suspended over the table, the long fingers
arched slightly as if still imbued with the energy of the composer.
"Anything else?"
He gave it some more thought, then shook his head.
She took up her knife and fork, went back to eating. "My mother taught me to play. It
was her profession, teaching piano, and as soon as she felt that I was good enough, she
taught me Chopin. He was her favorite, but his music is immensely difficult to play—not
only technically but also getting the emotion right."
"Does your mother still play?"
Annaka shook her head. "Like Chopin, her health was frail. Tuberculosis. She died
when I was eighteen."
"A bad age to lose a parent."
"It changed my life forever. I was grief-stricken, of course, but much to my
astonishment and shame, beneath that I was angry at her,"
"Angry?"
She nodded. "I felt abandoned, unmoored, left at sea with no way to find my way back
home."
All at once Bourne understood how she could empathize with the difficulty of his loss
of memory.

She frowned. "But, really, what I regret most is how shabbily I treated her. When she
first proposed I take up the piano, I rebelled."
"Of course you did," he said gently. "It was her suggestion. Moreover, it was her
profession." He felt a small frisson in the pit of his stomach, as if she had just now played
one of Chopin's famous dissonances. "When I talked to my son about baseball, he turned
up his nose, wanted to play soccer instead." As he dredged up the memory of Joshua,
Bourne's eyes turned inward. "All his friends played soccer, but there was something else.
His mother was Thai; he was schooled in Buddhism at a very early age, as was her wish.
His 'American-ness' wasn't of interest to him."
Finished, Annaka pushed her plate away.
"On the contrary, I think it was probable that his 'American-ness' was very much on his
mind," she said. "How could it be otherwise? Don't you think he was reminded of it every
day at school?"
Unbidden came an image of Joshua in bandages, one eye black-and-blue. When he had
asked Dao about it, she had told him that the child had fallen at home, but the following
day she had taken Joshua to school herself, had stayed there for several hours. He'd never
questioned her; at the time he'd been far too busy at work even to think it through himself.
"It never occurred to me," he said now.
Annaka shrugged and, without perceptible irony, said, "Why should it? You're
American. The world belongs to you."
Was that the source of her innate animosity? he wondered. Was it simply generic, the
fear of the ugly American that had lately been resurrected?'
She asked the waiter for more coffee. "At least you're able to work things out with your
son," she said. "With my mother ..." She shrugged.
"My son's dead," Bourne said, "along with his sister and mother. They were killed in
Phnom Penh many years ago."
"Oh." It appeared that he had finally punctured her cool, steely exterior. "I'm so sorry."
He turned his head away; any talk of Joshua felt like salt being rubbed into an open
wound. "Surely you came to terms with your mother before she died."
"I wish I had." Annaka stared down at her coffee, a look of concentration on her face.
"It wasn't until she introduced me to Chopin that I understood the full measure of the gift
she had given me. How I loved to play the Nocturnes, even when I was far from
accomplished!"
"You didn't tell her?"
"I was a teenager; we weren't exactly talking." Her eyes darkened in sorrow. "Now that
she's gone, I wish I had."
"You had your father."
"Yes, of course," she said. "I had him."

CHAPTER SEVENTEEN

The tactical Non-Lethal Weapons Directorate was housed in a series of anonymouslooking red-brick buildings covered with climbing ivy that had once been a women's
boarding school. The Agency had deemed it more secure to take over an existing site than
to build one from scratch. That way they could gut the structures, creating from the inside
the warren of labs, conference rooms and testing sites the directorate required, using their
own highly skilled personnel rather than outside contractors.
Even though Lindros showed his ID he was taken inside an all-white windowless room
where he was photographed, fingerprinted and his retinas scanned. He waited alone.
Finally, after fifteen minutes or so, a CIA suit entered, addressed Lindros, "Deputy
Director Lindros, Director Driver will see you now."
Without a word. Lindros followed the suit out of the room. They spent another five
minutes marching up and down featureless corridors with indirect lighting. For all he
knew, he was being led around in a circle.
At length, the suit stopped at a door that, as far as Lindros could tell, was identical to
all the others they had passed. As with the others, there was no marking, no identification
of any sort anywhere on or near the door, save for two small bulbs. One glowed a deep
red. The suit rapped his knuckles three times on the door. A moment later the red light
went out and the other bulb glowed green. The suit opened the door, stepped back for him
to go through.
On the other side of it, he found Director Randy Driver, a sandy-haired individual with
a Marine high-and-tight haircut, a blade-straight nose and narrow blue eyes that gave him
a perpetually suspicious look. He had wide shoulders and a muscular torso he liked to
show off a bit too much. He sat in a high-tech mesh swivel chair behind a smoked glass
and stainless-steel desk. In the center of each white metal wall hung a reproduction of a
Mark Rothko painting, each looking like swaths of colored bandages applied to a raw
wound.
"Deputy Director, an unexpected pleasure," Driver said with a tight smile that belied
his words. "I confess I'm not accustomed to snap inspections. I would've preferred the
courtesy of an appointment."
"Apologies," Lindros said, "but this isn't a snap inspection. I'm conducting a murder
investigation."
"Alexander Conklin's murder, I presume."
"Indeed. I need to interview one of your people. A Dr. Felix Schiffer."
It was as if Lindros had dropped an immobility bomb. Driver sat unmoving behind his
desk, the tight smile frozen on his face like a rictus. At last, Driver seemed to regain his
composure. "What on earth for?"
"I just told you," Lindros said. "It's part of our ongoing investigation."
Driver spread his hands. "I can't see how."
"It's not required that you do," Lindros said shortly. Driver had made him sit and wait
like a child at detention, now he was being given a verbal runaround. Lindros was rapidly
losing patience with him. "All that's required is that you tell me where Dr. Schiffer is."
Driver's face closed down entirely. "The moment you crossed my threshold, you
entered my territory." He stood. "While you were undergoing our identification

procedures, I took the liberty of calling the DCI. His office has no idea why you might be
here."
"Of course not," Lindros retorted, knowing he'd already lost the battle. "The DCI
debriefs me at the end of the each day."
"I've no interest whatsoever in your operations, Deputy Director. The bottom line is
that no one interviews any of my personnel without express written authorization from
the DCI himself."
"The DCI has empowered me to take this investigation wherever I deem it necessary."
"I've only your word for that." Driver shrugged. "You can see my point ofvi—"
"As a matter of fact, I can't," Lindros said. He knew that continuing on in this vein
would get him nowhere. Worse, it wasn't politic, but Randy Driver had pissed him off
and he couldn't help himself. "In my view, you're being obstinate and obstructionist."
Driver leaned forward, his knuckles cracking as he pushed them down against the desk
top. "Your view is irrelevant. In the absence of official signed documents, I have nothing
more to say to you. This interview is at an end."
The suit must have been listening in on the conversation because just then the door
opened and he stood there, waiting to escort Lindros out.
It was while riding down a perp that Detective Harris got the brainstorm. He'd received
the all-points radio call about the male Caucasian in a black late model Pontiac GTO,
Virginia plates, who'd run a red light outside of Falls Church, heading south on Route
649. Harris, who had been inexplicably banished by Martin Lindros from the ConklinPanov murders, was in Sleepy Hollow, following up on a convenience store robberymurder when the call came in. Right on 649.
He spun his cruiser around in a ragged U-turn, then had headed off, lights going, siren
blaring, heading north on 649. Almost immediately, he saw the black GTO and behind it
a string of three Virginia state trooper cars.
He veered across the median in a blare of horns and screeching tires coming from the
oncoming traffic and headed straight at the GTO. The driver saw him, changed lanes, and
as Harris began to follow him through the jigsaw puzzle of stalled traffic, he veered off
the road itself, zipping across the breakdown lane.
Harris, calculating vectors, nosed his cruiser on an intercept course, which forced the
plunging GTO onto the apron of a gas station. If he didn't pull up, he'd crash right into the
line of pumps.
As the GTO screamed to a halt, rocking on its oversized shocks, Harris scrambled out
of his car, his service revolver drawn, headed straight at the driver.
"Get out of the car with your hands in the air!" Harris called.
"Officer—"
"Shut up and do as I say!" Harris said, advancing steadily, his eyes peeled for any sign
of a weapon.
"Okay, okay!"

The driver got out of the car just as the other cruisers caught up. Harris could see that
the perp was no more than twenty-two, thin as a rail. They found a pint of liquor in the
car and, underneath the front seat, a gun.
"I've got a license for it!" the young man said. "Just look in the glove compartment!"
The gun was, indeed, licensed. The young man was a diamond courier.
Why he'd been drinking was another story, one Harris wasn't particularly interested in.
Back at the station, what had caught his attention was that the license didn't check out.
He made a call to the store that had supposedly sold the young man the gun. He got a
foreign-sounding voice that admitted selling the young man the gun, but something in
that voice nagged at Harris. So he'd taken a ride over to the store, only to find that it
didn't exist. Instead, he found a single Russian with a computer server. He arrested the
Russian and impounded the server.
Now he returned to the station, accessed the gun-permit database for the last six
months. He plugged in the name of the bogus gun store and discovered, to his shock,
more than three hundred false sales that were used to generate legitimate permits. But
there was an even bigger surprise waiting for him when he accessed the files on the
server he'd confiscated. When he saw the entry, he grabbed his phone and dialed Lindros'
cell.
"Hey, it's Harry."
"Oh, hello," Lindros said, as if his attention was elsewhere.
"What's the matter?" Harris asked. "You sound terrible."
"I'm stymied. Worse, I just got my teeth figuratively kicked in and now I'm wondering
if I have enough ammunition to go to the Old Man with it."
"Listen, Martin, I know I'm officially off the case—"
"Jesus, Harry, I've been meaning to talk to you about that."
"Never mind now," Detective Harris interrupted. He launched into an abbreviated
account of the driver of the GTO, his gun, and the scam being run on falsely registered
guns. "You see how it works," he went on. "These guys can get guns for anyone they
want."
"Yeah, so?" Lindros said without much enthusiasm.
"So they can also put anyone's name on the registration. Like David Webb's."
"That's a nice theory, but—"
"Martin, it isn't a theory!" Harris was fairly shouting into the receiver; everyone around
him looked up from their work, surprised at the rising sound of his voice. "It's the real
deal!"
"What?!"
"That's right. This same ring 'sold' a gun to one David Webb, only Webb never bought
it, because the store on the permit doesn't exist."
"Okay, but how d'we know Webb didn't know about this ring and used them to get a
gun illegally?"

"That's the beauty part," Harris said. "I have the electronic ledger from the ring. Every
sale is meticulously recorded. Funds for the gun Webb supposedly bought were wired in
from Budapest."
The monastery perched atop a mountain ridge. On the steep terraces far below, it grew
oranges and olives, but up above, where the building seemed implanted like a molar in
the bedrock itself, there grew only thistle and wild laudanum. Kri-kri, the ubiquitous
Cretan mountain goat, were the only creatures able to sustain themselves at the level of
the monastery.
The ancient stone construction had long been forgotten. Which of the marauding
peoples from the island's storied history had built it was difficult for a lay person to say.
It had, like Crete itself, passed through many hands, been mute witness to prayers and
sacrifice and the spilling of blood. Even from a cursory glance, however, it was clear that
it was very old.
From the dawn of time, the issue of security had been of paramount importance to
warriors and monastics alike, hence the monastery's place atop the mountain. On one
slope were the fragrant terraced groves; on the other was a gorge, not unlike the slash of a
Saracen's cutlass, scored deep into the rock, opening up the mountain's flesh.
Having encountered professional resistance at the house in Iraklion, Spalko proceeded
to plan this assault with a great deal of care. Making a run at the place in daylight was out
of the question. No matter in which direction they might try it, they were certain to be
mowed down long before they reached the monastery's thick and crenelated outer walls.
Therefore, while his men took their wounded compatriot back to the jet to be tended to by
the surgeon and to assemble the needed supplies, Spalko and Zina rented motorcycles so
that they could reconnoiter the area surrounding the monastery.
At the edge of the gorge, they left their vehicles and hiked down. The sky was an
absorbent blue, so brilliant that it seemed to imbue every other color with its aura. Birds
circled and rose on the thermals, and when the breeze picked up, the delicious scent of
orange blossoms perfumed the air. Ever since she boarded his personal jet, Zina had been
patiently waiting to find out why Spalko wanted to get her alone.
"There's an underground entrance to the monastery," Spalko said, as they descended
the rocky scree into the end of the gorge closest to the structure. The chestnut trees on the
lip of the gorge had given way to tougher cypresses, whose twisted trunks extended from
the earthen crannies between boulders. They used the flexible branches as impromptu
handholds as they continued down the steep slope of the gorge.
Where the Shaykh got his information, Zina could only guess at. In any event, it was
clear that he possessed a worldwide network of people with ready access to almost any
information he could require.
They rested for a moment, leaning against an outcropping. The afternoon was getting
on, and they ate olives, flatbread and a bit of octopus marinated in olive oil, vinegar and
garlic.
"Tell me, Zina," Spalko said now, "do you think of Khalid Murat—do you miss him?"
"I miss him very much." Zina wiped her lips with the back of her hand, bit into a
wedge of flatbread. "But Hasan is our leader now; all things must pass. What happened to

him was tragic but not unexpected. We're all targets of the savage Russian regime; we all
have to live with that knowledge."
"What if I were to tell you that the Russians had nothing to do with Khalid Murat's
death?" Spalko said.
Zina stopped eating. "I don't understand. I know what happened. Everyone does."
"No," Spalko said softly, "all you know is what Hasan Arsenov has told you."
She stared at him, and in the dawning of comprehension her knees felt weak.
"How—" She was so full of emotion her voice failed her and she was obliged to clear
her throat, start over again, aware that part of her didn't want to know the answer to the
question she was about to ask. "How d'you know this?"
"I know," Spalko said levelly, "because Arsenov contracted with me to assassinate
Khalid Murat."
"But why?"
Spalko's eyes bored into hers. "Oh, you know, Zina—you, of all people— you who's
his lover, who knows him better than anyone—you know very well."
And, sadly, Zina did; Hasan had told her as much many times. Khalid Murat was part
of the old order. He couldn't think past the borders of Chechnya; in Hasan's opinion, he
was afraid to take on the world when he could not yet see a way for them to hold back the
Russian infidels. "Didn't you suspect?"
And the truly galling thing, she thought, was that she hadn't suspected, not for a
moment. She had believed Hasan's story from first word to last. She wanted to lie to the
Shaykh, to make herself look more clever in his eyes, but under the burden of his gaze,
she knew he'd see right through her and know she was lying, and then, she suspected,
he'd know she couldn't be trusted and he'd be finished with her.
And so, humiliated, she shook her head. "He had me fooled."
"You and everyone else," he said evenly. "Never mind." He smiled suddenly. "But
now you know the truth; you see the power of having information others don't."
She stood for a moment, her buttocks against the sun-heated rock, rubbing her palms
down her thighs. "What I don't understand," she said, "is why you've chosen to tell me."
Spalko heard the twin notes of fear and trepidation in her voice and decided that was as
it should be. She knew she stood on the edge of a precipice. If he was any judge of
character, she had suspected as much from the moment he had proposed she come with
him to Crete, certainly from the instant she had colluded with him in his lie to Arsenov.
"Yes," he said, "you've been chosen." "But for what?" She found that she was shaking.
He came and stood close to her. Blocking out the sunlight, he exchanged the sun's
warmth for his own. She could smell him, as she had in the hangar, and the male musk of
him made her wet.
"You've been chosen for great things." As he came ever closer, his voice dropped in
volume even while it was increasing in intensity.
"Zina," he whispered, "Hasan Arsenov is weak. I knew it the moment he came to me
with his scheme for assassination. Why should he need me? I asked myself. A strong
warrior who believes his leader is no longer fit to lead will undertake to murder the man

himself; he will not hire out the deed to others who, if they are clever and patient, will
one day use his weakness against him."
Zina was trembling, both from his words and the force of his physical presence, which
was making her feel as if her skin was prickling, her hair standing on end. Her mouth was
dry, her throat full with longing.
"If Hasan Arsenov is weak, Zina, of what use is he to me?" Spalko put a hand on her
breast and Zina's nostrils flared. "I'll tell you." She closed her eyes. "The mission we'll
shortly embark on is fraught with danger every step of the way." He squeezed gently,
pulling upward with agonizing slowness. "In the event something goes wrong, it's
prudent to have a leader who can like a magnet attract the attention of the enemy,
drawing them toward him even as the real work goes on unimpeded." He pressed his
body against hers, felt her rising against him in a kind of spasm she was powerless to
control. "Do you see what I mean?"
"Yes," she whispered.
"You're the strong one, Zina. If you had wanted to dethrone Khalid Murat, you'd never
have come to me first. You'd have taken his life yourself and considered it a blessing
you'd done for yourself and for your people." His other hand moved inward along her
thigh. "Isn't that so?"
"Yes," she breathed. "But my people will never accept a female leader. It's
inconceivable."
"To them but not to us." He drew one leg away. "Think, Zina. How will you make it
happen?"
With the hot rush of hormones racing through her, it was hard to think clearly. Part of
her realized that that was the point. It wasn't simply that he wanted to take her here in the
cleft of the gorge, against the naked rocks, beneath the naked sky. As he had back in the
architect's house, he was submitting her to another test. If she lost herself completely now,
if she failed to put her mind in gear, if he could make her so beclouded with desire that
she couldn't answer his question, then he would be done with her. He would find another
candidate to serve his purpose.
Even as he opened her blouse, touched her burning skin, she forced herself to
remember how it had been with Khalid Murat, how after his advisors had left their twiceweekly councils, he had listened to what she had to say and often acted on it. She'd never
dared tell Hasan the role she'd played, for fear she would be abandoned to the brutality of
his jealousy.
But now, splayed out on the rock beneath the Shaykh's advances, she extrapolated
forward. Grabbing the back of the Shayhk's head, pulling it down to her neck, she
whispered in his ear, "I'll find someone—someone physically intimidating, someone
whose love for me will make him compliant—and I will command through him. It'll be
his face the Chechen see, his voice they'll hear, but he'll be doing precisely what I tell him
to do." He'd pulled his upper torso away for a moment and she looked up into his eyes,
saw them glittering as much with admiration as with lust, and with another tremor of
exultation she knew that she had passed her second test. And then, opened and all at once
impaled, she groaned in a long, drawn-out exclamation of their shared joy.

CHAPTER EIGHTEEN
The scent of coffee still infused the apartment. They had returned after their meal
without dawdling in time-honored tradition over coffee and dessert. Bourne had too much
on his mind. But the respite, however brief, had served to revive him, had allowed his
subconscious to work on information he needed to process.
They entered the apartment very close together. Citrus and musk rose off her like mist
off a river; he couldn't help inhaling it deep into his lungs. In order to distract himself, he
grimly turned his mind to the business at hand.
"Did you notice the burns and lesions, the punctures and ligature marks on László
Molnar's body?"
She shuddered. "Don't remind me."
"He'd been tortured over a period of many hours, perhaps as much as a couple of
days."
She looked at him from beneath straight and serious brows.
"Which means," he said, "that he may have given away Dr. Schiffer's location."
"Or he may not have," she said, "which would also be a reason to kill him."
"I don't think we can afford to make that assumption."
"What d'you mean'we'?"
"Yes, I know, as of now I'm on my own."
"Are you trying to make me feel guilty? You forget, I have no interest in finding Dr.
Schiffer."
"Even if it meant a disaster for the world at large if he fell into the wrong hands?"
"What d'you mean?"
Khan, in his rental car downstairs, pressed the ear-bud. Their words were coming in
clearly.
"Alex Conklin was a master technician—it was his speciality. From what I've learned,
he was better at planning and executing complex missions than anyone I ever met. As I
told you, he wanted Dr. Schiffer so badly that he poached him off a top-secret
Department of Defense program, brought him over to the CIA and then promptly
'disappeared' him. That means whatever Schiffer was working on was so important that
Alex felt the need to keep him out of harm's way. And as it turned out, he was right,
because someone kidnapped Dr. Schiffer. The operation your father ran for him got him
away, hidden somewhere only Ldszlo Molnar knew about. Now your father's dead and so
is Molnar. The difference is that Molnar was tortured before he was killed."
Khan sat up straighter, his heart beating fast. Ybwr father? Could the woman Bourne
was with, the one to whom he'd paid no attention—could she really be Annaka?
Annaka stood in a patch of sunlight coming in through her bay window. "What d'you
think Dr. Schiffer was working on that interested all these people so much?"

"I thought you had no interest in Dr. Schiffer," Bourne said.
"Don't be snide. Just answer the question."
"Schiffer is the world's foremost expert in bacteriological particulate behavior. That's
what I found out from the forum site Molnar had visited. I told you, but you were too
busy finding poor Molnar's corpse."
"That sounds like gibberish to me."
"Remember the Web site Molnar had accessed?"
"Anthrax, Argentinean hemorrhagic fever ..."
"Cryptococcosis, pneumonic plague. I think it's possible that the good doctor was
working with these lethal biologicals or something similar, maybe something even
worse."
Annaka stared at him for a moment, shook her head.
"I think what got Alex so excited—and frightened—was that Dr. Schiffer has invented
a device that could be used as a biological weapon. If so, he holds one of the terrorists'
holy grails."
"Oh, my God! But that's only a guess. How can you be sure you're right?"
"I've just got to keep digging." Bourne said. "Still so sanguine about Dr. Schiffer's
whereabouts?"
"But I don't see how we can find him." She turned and went to the piano, as if it were a
touchstone or a talisman to keep her safe from harm.
"We," Bourne said. "You said 'we.'"
"A slip of the tongue."
"A Freudian slip, it would seem."
"Stop it," she said crossly, "right now."
He had gotten enough of the measure of her to know that she meant what she said. He
went and sat down behind the escritoire. He saw the LAN line that connected her laptop
computer to the Internet.
"I've got an idea." he said. That was when he saw the scratches. The sunlight was
hitting the highly polished surface of the piano bench in such a way that he could see
several marks, freshly made. Someone had been in the apartment while they had been out.
For what reason? He looked around for any signs of a disturbance.
"What is it?" Annaka asked. "What's the matter?"
"Nothing," he said. But the pillow wasn't in quite the same position in which he'd left it;
it was now skewed a bit to the right.
She put her hand on her hip. "So what's your idea?"
"I need to get something first," he improvised, "from the hotel." He didn't want to
alarm her, but he needed to find a way to do some clandestine recon work. It was
possible—perhaps even likely—that whoever had been in the apartment was still nearby.
After all, they'd been under surveillance at László Molnar's apartment. But how the hell
had the watcher trailed them here? he asked himself. He'd been careful in every way that
he could imagine. There was a ready answer, of course: Khan had found him.

Bourne grabbed his leather jacket and headed for the door. "I won't be long, I promise.
In the meantime, if you want to be useful, you can go back on that Web site, see what
more you can discover."
Jamie Hull, head of American security at the terrorism summit in Reykjavik, had a
thing for Arabs. He didn't like them; he didn't trust them. They didn't even believe in
God—at least, not the right one—let alone believe in Christ the Savior, he thought sourly
as he strode down the hallway of the vast Oskjuhlid Hotel.
Another reason to dislike them: They had under their control three-quarters of the
world's oil. But then, if not for that, no one would've paid them the slightest attention, and
all things being equal, they would've wiped themselves out through their indecipherable
webs of intertribal warfare. As it was, there were four different Arabic security teams,
one for each country present, but Feyd al-Saoud coordinated their work.
As Arabs went, Feyd al-Saoud wasn't so bad. He was a Saudi—or was it Sunni? Hull
shook his head. He didn't know. This was another reason he didn't like them; you never
could tell who the hell they were or whose arm they'd cut off, given the chance. Feyd alSaoud was even Western-schooled, somewhere in London, Oxford—or was it Cambridge?
Hull asked himself. As if there was any difference! The point was you could speak to the
man in plain English without him looking at you as if you'd just grown a second head.
Also, it seemed to Hull, he was a reasonable man, which meant that he knew his place.
When it came to the president's needs and desires, he deferred to Hull on almost
everything, which was more than you could say for that sonuva-socialist-bitch Boris
Illyich Karpov. He regretted bitterly having complained about him to the Old Man and
being barked at in return, but, really, Karpov was the most exasperating bastard Hull had
ever had the misfortune to work with.
He entered the multitiered conference theater where the summit itself would take place.
It was a perfect oval, with a wave-form ceiling made up of blue panels of acoustic
baffling. Hidden behind these panels were the large air ducts that allowed in the air
filtered by the forum's sophisticated HVAC system, completely separate from the hotel's
massive network. For the rest, the walls were of polished teak, the seats blue-cushioned,
the horizontal surfaces either bronze or smoked-glass.
Here, every day since he had arrived, he and his two counterparts met in the mornings
to refine and argue about details of the elaborate security arrangements. In the afternoons
they reconvened with their respective staffs to review the details and to brief their
respective personnel on the latest procedures. Ever since they'd arrived, the entire hotel
had been closed to the public so that the security teams could do their electronic sweeps
and inspections and make the area absolutely secure.
As he walked into the brightly lit forum, he saw his counterparts: Feyd al-Saoud, slim
and dark-eyed above his beak of a nose, with a bearing that was almost regal; Boris
Illyich Karpov, head of the FSB's elite Alpha Unit, brawny and bull-like, with wide
shoulders and narrow hips, a flat Tatar face that seemed brutal beneath heavy brows and
thick black hair. Hull had never seen Karpov smile, and as for Feyd al-Saoud, he doubted
he knew how.

"Good morning, fellow travelers," Boris Illyich Karpov said in his ponderous deadpan
manner that put Hull in mind of a 1950's newscaster. "We have but three days until the
summit commences and there is still much work to accomplish. Shall we begin?"
"By all means," Feyd al-Saoud said, taking his accustomed seat on the dais where just
thirty-six hours from now the five heads of the leading Arab states would sit side by side
with residents of the United States and Russia in order to hammer out the first concerted
Arab-Western initiative to stop international terrorism in its tracks. "I've received
instructions from my counterparts in the other attending Islamic nations and will be
pleased to relay them to you."
"Demands, you mean," Karpov said belligerently. He'd never gotten over their decision
to speak English at their briefings; he'd been outvoted two to one.
"Boris, why must you always put a negative spin on things?" Hull said.
Karpov bristled; Hull knew he disliked American informality. "Demands have a
certain stench, Mr. Hull." He tapped the end of his ruddy nose. "I can smell them."
"I'm surprised you can smell anything, Boris, after years of drinking vodka."
"Drinking vodka makes us strong, makes us real men." Karpov turned his red lips into
a bow of derision. "Not like you Americans."
"I should listen to you, Boris? You, a Russian? Your country's an abject failure.
Communism proved so corrupt Russia imploded under its weight. And as for your people,
they're spiritually bankrupt."
Karpov leaped up, his cheeks as red as his nose and lips. "I've had enough of your
insults!"
"Too bad." Hull stood, kicking his chair over, forgetting completely the DCI's
admonishment. "I'm only just warming up."
"Gentlemen, gentlemen!" Feyd al-Saoud interposed himself between the two
antagonists. "Tell me, please, how these childish arguments are going to further the task
we've all been sent here to accomplish." His voice was calm and even-toned as he looked
from one to the other. "We each have our respective heads of state, whom we serve with
unswerving loyalty. Isn't that true? Then we must serve them in the best way we can." He
wouldn't let up until both had agreed.
Karpov sat back down, though with arms crossed over his chest. Hull righted his chair,
dragged it back to the table and threw himself into it, a sour expression on his face.
Observing them, Feyd al-Saoud said, "We may not like one another, but we must learn
to work together."
Dimly, Hull was aware that there was something else about Karpov besides his
aggressive intransigence that got under his skin. It took him some moments to locate its
origin, but at length he did. Something about Karpov—his smug self-satisfaction—
reminded him of David Webb, or Jason Bourne, as all Agency personnel had been
ordered to call him. It was Bourne who'd become Alex Conklin's fair-haired boy, despite
all the politicking and subtle campaigning Hull had done on his own behalf before he'd
given up and gone into the Counterterrorist Center. He'd made a success of his new post,
no question, but he never forgot what Bourne had forced him to leave behind. Conklin
had been a legend within the Agency. Working with him was all Hull had dreamed about
ever since he'd joined the Agency twenty years ago. There are dreams one has as a child;

these aren't difficult to let go of. But the dreams one had as an adult, well, that was
another matter entirely. The bitterness of what might have been never went away, at least,
not in Hull's experience.
He'd actually celebrated when the DCI had informed him that Bourne might be on his
way to Reykjavik. The thought of Bourne having turned on his mentor and gone rogue
was one that made his blood boil. If only Conklin had chosen him, Hull had thought, he'd
be alive today. The thought that he might be the one to terminate Bourne in an Agency
sanction was a dream come true. But then he'd got the news that Bourne was dead and his
elation had turned to disappointment. He'd become increasingly testy with everyone,
including the Secret Service operatives with whom it was vital he keep a close and open
relationship. Now, in the absence of any kind of fulfillment, he leveled a murderous look
at Karpov and received one in return.
Bourne didn't take the elevator down when he left Annaka's apartment. Instead, he
went up the short flight of utility stairs that led to the roof. There, he confronted the alarm
system and defeated it quickly and efficiently.
The sun had abandoned the afternoon to slate-gray clouds and a stiff quartering wind.
As Bourne gazed south, he could see the four elaborate domes of the Kiraly Turkish
Baths. He went to the parapet, leaned over in more or less the same spot that Khan had
occupied no more than an hour before.
From this vantage point, he scanned the street, first for anyone standing in a shadowed
doorway, then for any pedestrians walking too slowly or stopped altogether. He watched
two young women strolling arm in arm, a mother pushing a pram, and an old man he
scrutinized, recalling Khan's expert work as a chameleon.
Finding nothing suspicious, he turned his attention to the parked cars, looking for
anything out of the ordinary. All rental cars in Hungary were obliged to have a sticker
identifying themselves as such. In this residential neighborhood, a rental car was
something he'd need to investigate.
He found one on a black Skoda up the block and across the street. He studied its
position in detail. Anyone sitting behind the wheel would have an unobstructed view of
the front entrance to 106-108 Fo utca. At the moment, however, there was no one behind
the wheel or anywhere else inside the car.
He turned and strode back across the rooftop.
Khan, crouched on the stairwell in readiness, watched Bourne coming toward him.
This was his chance, he knew. Bourne, his mind no doubt filled with matters of
surveillance, was completely unsuspecting. As if in a dream—a dream he'd had in his
mind for decades—he saw Bourne heading straight toward him, his eyes clouded with
thought. Khan was filled with rage. This was the man who had sat next to him and not
recognized him, who even when Khan had identified himself had rejected him for who he
was. This only intensified Khan's belief that Bourne had never wanted him, that he was
all too ready to run away and abandon him.
Therefore, when Khan rose, it was with righteous fury. As Bourne stepped into the
shadow of the doorway, Khan slammed his forehead hard into the bridge of his nose.
Blood flew and Bourne staggered backward. Khan, pressing his advantage, moved in, but
Bourne kicked out. "Che-sah!" Bourne exhaled.

Khan absorbed the kick by partially deflecting it, then clamped his left arm against the
side of his body, trapping Bourne's ankle in between. Bourne surprised him, then. Instead
of being thrown off balance, he rose up, pressing his back and buttocks against the steel
door, kicked with his right foot, delivering a sickening blow to Khan's right shoulder, so
that Khan was obliged to let go of Bourne's left ankle. "Mee-sah!" Bourne cried softly.
He came at Khan, who shuddered as if in pain even as he delivered a straight-fingered
blow to Bourne's sternum. At once he gripped Bourne's head on either side, cracked it
against the roof door. Bourne's eyes went out of focus.
"What's Spalko up to?" Khan said harshly. "You know, don't you?" Bourne's head was
swimming with pain and shock. He tried to focus his eyes and clear his mind at the same
time.
"Who's ... Spalko?" His voice seemed watery, as if it was coming from a long way off.
"Of course you know."
Bourne shook his head, which produced a fusillade of daggers in his head all digging
in at once. He squeezed his eyes shut. "I thought... I thought you wanted to kill me."
"Listen to me!"
"Who are you?" Bourne whispered hoarsely. "How d'you know about my son? How
d'you know about Joshua?"
"Listen to me!" Khan put his head close to Bourne's. "Stepan Spalko is the man who
ordered Alex Conklin's death, the man who set you up—who set us both up. Why did he
do that, Bourne? You know and I need to know!"
Bourne felt as if were in the grip of an ice floe, everything moving with infinite
slowness. He couldn't think, couldn't seem to put two ideas together. Then he noticed
something. The oddness of it cut through the strange inertia in which he was gripped.
There was something in Khan's right ear. What was it? Under the guise of extreme pain,
he moved his head slightly, saw that it was a miniature electronic receiver. "Who are
you?" he said. "Goddammit, who are you!"
There seemed to be two conversations going on simultaneously, as if the two men were
in different worlds, living different lives. Their voices raised, their emotions flamed from
embers, and the more they shouted, the further apart they seemed to get.
"I told you!" Khan's hands were covered with Bourne's blood, which had now begun to
coagulate in his nostrils. "I'm your son!"
And with those words, the stasis was broken, their worlds collided once again. The
rage that had swept Bourne up in its fist when the hotel manager had frustrated him
thundered again in his ears. He screamed, driving Khan backward through the door, out
onto the roof.
Ignoring the pain in his head, he hooked his ankle behind Khan, shoved him hard. But
Khan grabbed hold of him as he went down, raising his legs as his back struck the roof
tiles, lifting Bourne off his feet, and with a powerful kick sent him tumbling head over
heels.
Bourne tucked his head under, landed on his shoulders and rolled, dissipating most of
the impact. They both regained their feet at the same time, their arms outstretched, their
fingers grasping for purchase. Bourne brought his arms down suddenly, striking them
hard onto Khan's wrists, breaking his hold, spinning him sideways. Bourne butted him,

using his forehead against the nerve bundle just below Khan's ear. Khan's left side went
slack, and Bourne, using his advantage, drove his balled fist into Khan's face.
Khan staggered, his knees buckling slightly, but like a punch-drunk heavyweight, he
refused to go down. Bourne, a maddened bull, struck him again and again, driving him
back with every blow, nearer and nearer the parapet. But in his extreme rage he made a
mistake, allowing Khan inside his guard. It surprised him when, instead of staggering
back beneath the blow, Khan attacked, driving forward off his back foot and, midway
through, transferring all his weight to his front foot. The resulting strike rattled Bourne's
teeth even as it took him off his feet.
Bourne fell to his knees, and Khan struck him a tremendous blow above his ribs. He
began to topple over but Khan grabbed him by the throat and began to squeeze.
"You'd better tell me now," he said thickly. "You'd better tell me everything you
know."
Bourne, panting and in intense pain, said, "Go to hell!"
Khan struck his jaw with the edge of his hand.
"Why won't you listen?" "Try a little more force," Bourne said. "You're completely
insane."
"That's your plan, isn't it?" Bourne shook his head doggedly. "This whole sick story
about you being Joshua—" "I am your son."
"Listen to yourself—you can't even say his name. You can drop the farce; it'll avail
you nothing now. You're an international assassin named Khan. I won't lead you to this
Spalko or whoever it is you're planning to get to. I won't be anyone's cat's-paw again."
"You don't know what you're doing. You don't know—" He broke off, shook his head
violently, changed tacks. He cradled the small carved stone Buddha in his free palm.
"Look at this, Bourne!" He spat out the words as if they were poisonous. "Look at it!"
"A talisman anyone in Southeast Asia could pick up—" "Not this one. You gave this
one to me—yes, you did." His eyes blazed, and his voice held a tremor that, to his shame,
he couldn't control. "And then you abandoned me to die in the jungles of—"
A gunshot ricocheted off the roof tiles beside Khan's right leg and, releasing Bourne,
he jumped back. A second shot nearly struck his shoulder as he scuttled behind the brick
wall of the elevator vent.
Bourne turned his head, saw Annaka crouched at the top of the stairwell, her gun
gripped tightly in both hands. Cautiously, she came forward. She risked a glance at
Bourne. "Are you all right?"
He nodded, but at the same time Khan, choosing wisely, leaped from his hiding place,
bounded to the side of the rooftop, jumped onto the next building. Bourne noted that
instead of firing wildly, Annaka put up her gun and turned to him.
"How can you be all right?" she asked. "There's blood all over you!" "It's just from my
nose." He felt lightheaded as he sat up. Reacting to her dubious expression, he was
compelled to add, "Really, it looks like a lot of blood, but it's nothing."
She put a wad of tissues against his nose as he started to bleed again.
"Thank you."

She brushed away his words with those of her own. "You said you needed to get
something back at your hotel. Why did you come up here?"
Slowly, he rose to his feet but not without her help. "Wait a minute." She glanced in
the direction Khan had gone, then turned back to Bourne, a look of revelation on her face.
"He's the one who's been watching us, isn't he? The one who called the police when we
were at László Molnar's apartment."
"I don't know."
She shook her head. "I don't believe you. It's the only plausible explanation for why
you lied to me. You didn't want to alarm me because you'd told me we were safe here.
What changed?"
He hesitated for a moment, then realized that he had no choice but to tell her the truth.
"When we came back from the caf6, there were new scratch marks on your piano bench."
"What?" Her eyes opened wide and she shook her head. "I don't understand."
Bourne thought of the electronic receiver in Khan's right ear. "Let's go back to the
apartment and I'll show you."
He walked toward the open doorway, but she hesitated. "I don't know."
Turning back, he said wearily, "What don't you know?"
A hard look had come into her face, along with a kind of ruefulness. "You lied to me."
"I did it to protect you, Annaka."
Her eyes were large and glistening. "How can I trust you now?"
"Annaka—"
"Please tell me, because I really want to know." She stood her ground, and he knew
that she wouldn't take even a step toward the staircase. "I need to have an answer I can
cling to and believe."
"What d'you want me to say?"
She lifted her arms, let them fall to her side in gesture of exasperation. "Do you see
what you're doing, turning everything I say back on itself?" She shook her head. "Where
did you learn to make people feel like shit?"
"I wanted to keep you out of harm's way," he said. She had hurt him deeply and,
despite his carefully neutral expression, he suspected she knew it. "I thought I was doing
the right thing. I still think so, even if it meant keeping the truth from you, at least for a
little while."
She looked at him for a long time. The gusting wind took her copper hair, floated it out
like a bird's wing. Querulous voices drifted up from Fo utca, people wanting to know
what those noises were, a car backfiring or something else? There were no answers, and
now, save for the intermittent barking of a dog, the neighborhood was quiet.
"You thought you could handle the situation," Annaka said, "y°u thought you could
handle him"
Bourne walked stiff-legged over to the front parapet, where he leaned out. Against all
odds, the rental car was still there, empty. Maybe it wasn't Khan's, or maybe Khan hadn't
fled the scene. With some difficulty, Bourne stood up straight. The pain was coming in
waves, breaking harder on the shore of his consciousness as the endorphins released by

the shock of the trauma began to dissipate. Every bone in his body seemed to ache, but
none more than his jaw and his ribs.
At last, he found it in himself to answer her truthfully. "I suppose so, yes."
She lifted a hand, pulled her hair away from her cheek. "Who is he, Jason?"
It was the first time she had called him by his given name, but it scarcely registered on
him. At the moment, he was trying—and failing—to give her an answer that would
satisfy himself.
Khan, splayed on the stairs of the building onto whose roof he had leaped, stared
unseeing at the featureless ceiling of the stairwell. He waited for Bourne to come get him.
Or, he wondered with the wandering mind of those in shock, was he waiting for Annaka
Vadas to level her gun at him and pull the trigger? He should be in his car now, driving
away, and yet here he was, as inert as a fly caught in a spiderweb.
His buzzing mind was swept by shoulds. He should've killed Bourne when he first had
him in his sights, but he had a plan then, one that made sense, one that he had
meticulously outlined to himself, one that would bring him—so he believed then!—the
maximum measure of revenge that was his due. He should've killed Bourne in the cargo
hold of the plane bound for Paris. Surely he'd meant to, just as he'd meant to just now.
It would be easy to tell himself that he'd been interrupted by Annaka Vadas, but the
blinding, incomprehensible truth was that he'd had his chance before she arrived on the
scene and had made a choice not to exact his revenge.
Why? He was completely at a loss to say.
His mind, usually as calm as a lake, jumped around from memory to memory, as if it
found the present unbearable. He recalled the room in which he was incarcerated during
his years with the Vietnamese gunrunner, his brief moment of freedom before being
saved by the missionary, Richard Wick. He remembered Wick's house, the sense of space
and freedom that gradually eroded, the creeping horror of his time with the Khmer Rouge.
The worst part—the part he kept trying to forget—was that initially, he'd been attracted
to the Khmer Rouge philosophy. Ironically enough, because it was founded by a group of
young Cambodian radicals trained in Paris, its ethos was based on French nihilism. "The
past is death! Destroy everything to create a new future!" This was the Khmer Rouge
mantra, repeated over and over until it ground down all other thought or points of view.
It was hardly surprising that their worldview would initially draw Khan—himself an
unwitting refugee, abandoned, marginalized—an outcast by circumstance rather than by
design. For Khan the past was death— witness his recurring dream. But if he first learned
to destroy from them, it was because they had destroyed him first.
Not content to believe his story of abandonment, they'd slowly drained the life, the
energy from him as they bled him a little every day. They wanted, so his interlocutor said,
to empty his mind of everything; they required a blank slate on which to write their
radical version of the new future that awaited them all. They bled him, his smiling
interlocutor said, for his own good, to rid him of the toxins of the past. Every day, his
interlocutor read to him from their manifesto and then recited the names of those
opposing the rebel regime who had been killed. Most, of course, were unknown to Khan,
but a few—monks, mainly, as well as a smattering of boys his age—he had known, if

only in passing. Some, like the boys, had taunted him, settling the mantle of outcast on
his immature shoulders. After a time a new item was added to the agenda. Following the
interlocutor's reading of a particular section of the manifesto, Khan was required to repeat
it back. This he did, in an ever-increasingly forceful manner.
One day, after the requisite recitation and response, his interlocutor read off the names
of those newly killed in furtherance of the revolution. At the end of the list was Richard
Wick, the missionary who had taken him in, thinking he'd bring Khan to civilization and
to God. What roil of emotion this news elicited within Khan was impossible to say, but
the overriding feeling was one of dislocation. His last link to the world at large was now
gone. He was completely and utterly alone. In the relative privacy of the latrine, he had
wept without knowing why. If there was ever a man he hated, it was the one who'd used
and emotionally abandoned him, and now, unaccountably, he was crying over his death.
Later that day his interlocutor led him from the concrete bunker in which he'd been
housed ever since being taken prisoner. Even though the sky was low and it was raining
heavily, he'd blinked in the light of day. Time had passed; the rainy season had begun.
Lying in the stairwell, it occurred to Khan now that while he was growing up, he'd
never been in control of his own life. The truly curious and disturbing thing was that he
still wasn't. He'd been under the impression that he was a free agent, having gone to great
pains to set himself up in a business where he'd believed—naively, as it turned out—free
agents thrived. He could see now that ever since he'd taken on his first commission from
Spalko, the man had been manipulating him, and never more so than now.
If he was ever to break free of the chains that bound him, he'd have to do something
about Stepan Spalko. He knew he'd been immoderate with him at the end of their last
phone conversation, and now he regretted it. In that quick flash of anger, so
uncharacteristic of him, he'd accomplished nothing save to put Spalko on his guard. But
then, he realized, ever since Bourne had sat down beside him on the park bench in Old
Town Alexandria, his usual icy reserve had been shattered, and now emotions he could
neither name nor understand kept shooting up to the surface, roiling his consciousness,
muddying his intent. He realized with a start that when it came to Jason Bourne, he no
longer knew what he wanted.
He sat up, then looked around. He'd heard a sound; he was certain of it. He rose, put
one hand on the bannister, his muscles tense, poised for flight. And there it was again.
His head turned. What was that sound? Where had he heard it before?
His heart beat fast, his pulse in his throat as the sound rose through the stairwell,
echoing in his mind, for he was calling again: "Lee-Lee! Lee-Lee!"
But Lee-Lee couldn't answer; Lee-Lee was dead.

CHAPTER NINETEEN
The underground entrance to the monastery lay hidden by shadow and time in the
deepest cleft of the northernmost wall of the gorge. The lowering sun had revealed the
cleft to be more of a defile, as it must have centuries ago to the monks who had chosen
this location for their well-defended home. Perhaps they had been monk-warriors, for the

extensive fortifications spoke of battles and bloodshed and the need to keep their home
sacrosanct.
Silently the team moved into the defile, following the sun. There was no intimate talk
between Spalko and Zina now, no hint whatsoever of what had transpired between them,
even though it had been momentous. In a manner of speaking, it could be termed a form
of benediction; in any case, it was a transference of allegiance and of power whose
silence and secrecy only added to the ramifications of its effect. It was Spalko who once
again had metaphorically thrown a pebble in a still pond, only to sit back and watch the
effect as the resulting ripples spread outward, altering the basic nature of the pond and all
who lived in it.
The sun-splashed rocks vanished behind them as they moved into shadow, and they
clicked on their lights. Besides Spalko and Zina, there were two of them—the third
having been taken back to the jet at Kazantza-kis Airport, where the surgeon awaited.
They wore lightweight nylon backpacks, filled with all manner of paraphernalia from
canisters of tear gas to balls of twine and everything in between. Spalko didn't know what
they'd be up against and he was taking no chances.
The men went first, semiautomatic guns on wide straps slung over their shoulders, held
at the ready. The defile narrowed, forcing them to continue on in single-file. Soon,
however, the sky vanished beneath a wall of rock and they found themselves in a cave. It
was dank and musty, filled with the fetid odors of decay.
"It stinks like an open grave," one of the men said.
"Look!" the other cried. "Bones!"
They paused, their lights concentrated on a scattering of small mammal bones, but not
a hundred meters on they came upon the thigh-bone of a much larger mammal.
Zina squatted to take up the bone in her hand.
"Don't!" the first man cautioned. "It's bad luck to handle human bones."
"What are you talking about? Archaeologists do it all the time." Zina laughed. "Besides,
this might not be human at all." Nevertheless, she dropped it back into the dust of the
cave floor.
Five minutes later they were clustered around what was unmistakably a human skull.
Their lights gleamed off the brow ridge, threw the eye sockets into deepest shadow.
"What d'you think killed him?" Zina asked.
"Exposure, probably," Spalko said. "Or thirst."
"Poor beggar."
They kept going, deeper into the bedrock upon which the monastery was built. The
farther they went, the more numerous the bones became. Now they were all human, and
increasingly they were broken or fractured.
"I don't think these people were killed by either exposure or thirst," Zina said.
"What then?" one of the men asked, but no one had an answer.
Spalko ordered them curdy on. They had, by his calculation, just about reached the
spot below the monastery's crenelated outer walls. Up ahead, their lights picked out an
odd formation.

"The cave is split in two," one of the men said, shining his light on first the
passageway to the left, then the one to his right.
"Caves don't bifurcate," Spalko said. He pushed his way ahead of them, stuck his head
into the left-hand opening. "This one's a dead end." He ran his hand over the edges of the
openings. "These are man-made," he said. "Many years ago, possibly when the monastery
was first built." He stepped into the right-hand opening, his voice echoing strangely. "Yes,
this one goes on, but there are twists and turns."
When he came back out, he had an odd expression on his face. "I don't think this is a
passageway at all," he said. "No wonder Molnar chose this place to hide Dr. Schiffer. I
believe we're headed into a labyrinth."
The two men exchanged glances.
"In that case," Zina said, "how will we ever find our way back?"
"There's no way of knowing what we'll find in there." Spalko took out a small
rectangular object no larger than a deck of playing cards. He grinned as he showed her
how it worked. "A global positioning system. I've just electronically marked our starting
point." He nodded. "Let's go."
It didn't take them long, however, to discover the error of their ways, and not more
than five minutes later, they had reconvened outside the labyrinth.
"What's the matter?" Zina asked.
Spalko was frowning. "The GPS didn't work in there."
She shook her head. "What d'you think is wrong?"
"Some mineral in the rock itself must be blocking the signal from the satellite," Spalko
said. He couldn't afford to tell them that he had no idea why the GPS failed to work in the
labyrinth. Instead, he opened his backpack, took out a ball of twine "We'll take a lesson
from Theseus and unwind the twine as we go."
Zina eyed the ball uncertainly. "What if we run out of twine?"
"Theseus didn't," Spalko said. "And we're almost inside the monastery's walls, so let's
hope we don't run out, either."
Dr. Felix Schiffer was bored. For days now he'd done nothing but follow orders as his
cadre of protectors flew him under cover of night to Crete, then proceeded to periodically
move him from one location to another. They never stayed in one place for more than
three days. He'd liked the house in Iraklion, but that too had proved boring in the end.
There was nothing for him to do. They refused to bring him a newspaper or allow him to
listen to the radio. As for television, there was none available, but he had to assume they
would have kept him away from it, too. Still, he thought glumly, it was a damn sight
better than this moldering pile of stone, with only a cot for a bed and a fire for warmth.
Heavy chests and sideboards were virtually the only furniture, though the men had
brought folding chairs, cots and linens. There was no plumbing; they'd made a privy in
the courtyard and its stench reached all the way into the interior of the monastery. It was
gloomy and dank, even at noon, and God help them all when darkness fell. Not even a
light to read by, if there'd been anything to read.

He longed for freedom. If he'd been a God-fearing man, he would have prayed for his
deliverance. So many days since he'd seen Laszl6 Molnar or spoken to Alex Conklin.
When he asked his protectors about that, they invoked the word most sacred to them:
security. Communication was simply not secure. They took pains to reassure him that he
would soon be reunited with his friend and his benefactor. But when he asked when, all
they did was shrug and go back to their endless card game. He could sense that they were
bored as well, at least the ones not on guard duty.
There were seven of them. Originally, there were more, but the others had been left
behind in Iraklion. But from what he'd been able to glean, they should have been here by
now. Accordingly, there was no card game today—every member of the cadre was on
patrol. There was a distinct air of tension that set his teeth on edge.
Schiffer was a rather tall man, with piercing blue eyes and a strong-bridged nose below
a mass of salt-and-pepper hair. There was a time before he'd been recruited into DARPA
and had been more visible when he'd been taken for Burt Bacharach. Not being good
with people, he'd never known how to respond. He'd merely mumble something
unintelligible and turn away, but his obvious embarrassment only reinforced the
misapprehension.
He got up, walked idly across the room to the window, but he was intercepted by one
of the cadre and was turned away.
"Security," the mercenary said, his tension on his breath if not in his eyes.
"Security! Security! I'm sick to death of that word!" Schiffer exclaimed.
Nevertheless, he was herded back to the chair on which he was meant to sit. It was
away from all doors and windows. He shivered in the dampness.
"I miss my lab; I miss my work!" Schiffer looked into the dark eyes of the mercenary.
"I feel like I'm in prison, can you understand that?"
The cadre's leader, Sean Keegan, sensing his charge's unrest, strode swiftly over.
"Please take your seat, Doctor."
"But I—"
"It's for your own good," Keegan said. He was one of those black Irishmen, dark of
hair and eye, with a rough-hewn face brimming with grim determination, and a streetbrawler's lumpy physique. "We've been hired to keep you safe and we take that
responsibility seriously."
Obediently, Schiffer sat. "Would someone please tell me what's going on?"
Keegan stared down at him for some time. Then, making up his mind, he squatted next
to the chair. In a low voice, he said, "I've avoided keeping you informed, but I suppose it
might be best for you to know now."
"What?" Schiffer's face was pinched and pained. "What's happened?"
"Alex Conklin's dead."
"Oh, God, no." Schiffer wiped his suddenly sweating face with his hand.
"And as for László Molnar, we haven't heard from him in two days."
"Christ almighty!"

"Calm yourself, Doctor. It's entirely possible Molnar's been out of touch for security
reasons." Keegan's eyes met his. "On the other hand, the personnel we left at the house in
Iraklion have failed to show."
"I gathered as much," Schiffer said. "Do you think something... untoward has
happened to them?"
"I can't afford not to."
Schiffer's face shone; he couldn't stop himself from sweating in fear. "Then it's
possible Spalko's found out where I am; it's possible that he's here on Crete."
Keegan's face was set in stone. "That's the premise we're going by."
Schiffer's terror made him aggressive. "Well," he demanded, "what're you doing about
it?"
"We have men with machine pistols manning the ramparts, but I very much doubt
Spalko's foolish enough to try a ground assault across a treeless terrain." Keegan shook
his head. "No, if he's here, if he's coming for you, Doctor, he'll have no choice." He stood,
slung his machine-pistol over his shoulder. "His route will be through the labyrinth."
Spalko, in the labyrinth with his small party, was becoming more and more
apprehensive with every twist and turn they were forced to make. The labyrinth was the
only logical approach for an assault on the monastery, which meant they might very well
be walking into a trap.
He glanced down, saw the ball of twine was two-thirds behind them. They must be at
or near the center of the monastery by now; the trail of twine assured him that the
labyrinth hadn't taken them in a circle. At each branching, he believed that he'd chosen
well.
He turned to Zina, said under his breath, "I smell an ambush. I want you to stay here in
reserve." He patted her backpack. "If we run into trouble, you know what to do."
Zina nodded, and the three men moved off in a half-crouch. They had only just
disappeared when she heard machine-pistol fire coming in quick bursts. Quickly she
opened her backpack, drew out a canister of tear gas, headed off after them, following the
trail of the twine.
She smelled the stench of cordite before she turned the second corner. She peeked
around the corner, saw one of their unit sprawled on the ground in a pool of blood.
Spalko and the other man were pinned down by gunfire. From her vantage point, she
could tell that it was coming from two different directions.
Pulling the pin on the canister, she tossed it over Spalko's head. It struck the ground,
then rolled to the left, exploding in a soft hiss. Spalko had slapped his man's back, and
they retreated out of the spread of the gas.
They could hear coughing and retching. By this time they'd all donned their gas masks
and were ready to mount a second attack. Spalko rolled another canister to their right,
cutting short the gunfire directed at them, but not, regrettably, before his second man
caught three bullets in the chest and neck. He went down, blood bubbling from between
his slack lips.

Spalko and Zina split, one going right, the other left, killing the incapacitated
mercenaries—two each—with efficient bursts from their machine-pistols. They both saw
the stairway at the same time and made for it.
Sean Keegan grabbed Felix Schiffer even as he shouted orders for his men on the
ramparts to abandon their positions and return to the center of the monastery, where he
was now dragging his terrified charge.
He'd begun to act the instant he'd caught a whiff of the tear gas seeping up from the
labyrinth below. Moments later he heard the resumption of gunfire, then a deathly ringing
silence. Seeing his two men rush in, he directed them toward the stone staircase that led
down to where he'd deployed the rest of his men to ambush Spalko.
Keegan had for years been employed by the IRA before going out on his own as a
mercenary-for-hire, so he was well acquainted with situations where he was outmanned
and outgunned. In fact, he relished such situations, saw them as challenges to overcome.
But there was smoke now in the monastery proper, great billowing wafts of it, and now
a hail of machine-gun fire corning out of it. His men had no chance; they were mowed
down before they had a chance even to identify their killers.
Keegan didn't wait to identify them either. Hauling on Dr. Schiffer, he took them
through the warren of small, dark, stifling rooms, looking for a way out.
As they had planned, Spalko and Zina separated the moment they emerged from the
dense clouds of the smoke bomb they had tossed out the door at the head of the stairs
they had climbed. Spalko went methodically through the rooms while Zina looked for a
door to the outside.
It was Spalko who saw Schiffer and Keegan first, and he called to them, only to be
greeted with a burst of gunfire, obliging him to duck behind a heavy wooden chest.
"You've no hope of getting out of this alive," he called to the mercenary. "I don't want
you; I want Schiffer."
"It's the same thing," Keegan shouted back. "I was given a commission; I intend to
carry it out."
"To what purpose?" Spalko said. "Your employer, László Molnar, is dead. So is Janos
Vadas."
"I don't believe you," Keegan responded. Schiffer was whimpering and he shushed him.
"How d'you think I found you?" Spalko went on. "I ground it out of Molnar. Come on.
You know he's the only one who knew you were here."
Silence.
"They're all dead now," Spalko said, inching forward. "Who'll pay the last of your
commission? Hand over Schiffer and I'll pay you whatever you're owed, plus a bonus.
How does that sound?"
Keegan was about to answer, when Zina, having come at him from the opposite
direction, put a bullet in the back of his head.

The resulting explosion of blood and gore made Dr. Schiffer whimper like a whipped
dog. Then, with his last protector pitched over, he saw Stepan Spalko advancing toward
him. He turned and ran right into Zina's arms.
"There's nowhere to go, Felix," Spalko said. "You see that now, don't you?"
Schiffer stared wide-eyed at Zina. He began to gibber, and she put a hand to his head,
stroking his hair back from his damp forehead as if he were a child ill with fever.
"You were mine once," Spalko said as he stepped over Keegan's corpse. "And you're
mine again." From out of his backpack he took two items. They were made of surgical
steel, glass and titanium.
"Oh, God!" The groan from Schiffer was as heartfelt as it was involuntary.
Zina smiled at Schiffer, kissed him on both cheeks as if they were good friends
reunited after a long absence. At once, he burst into tears.
Spalko, enjoying the effect the NX 20 diffuser had on its inventor, said, "This is the
way the two halves fit together, isn't it, Felix?" Whole, the NX 20 was no larger than the
automatic weapon slung across Spalko's back. "Now that I've got a proper payload, you'll
teach me the proper use of it."
"No," Schiffer said hi a quavery voice. "No, no, no!"
"Don't you worry about a thing," Zina whispered as Spalko took hold of the back of Dr.
Schiffer's neck, sending yet another spasm of terror through the scientist's frame. "You're
in the best of hands now."
The flight of stairs was short, but, for Bourne, descending them was more painful than
he had expected. With every step he took, the trauma he'd received from the blow above
his ribs sent jolts of agony through him. What he needed was a hot bath and some sleep,
two things he couldn't yet afford.
Back in Annaka's apartment, he showed her the top of the piano bench and she swore
under her breath. Together they moved it beneath the light fixture and he stood on it.
"You see?"
She shook her head. "I haven't the slightest idea what's going on."
He went to the escritoire, scribbled on a pad: Do you have a ladder?
She looked at him oddly but nodded.
Go get it, he wrote.
When she brought it back into the living room, he climbed it high enough to look into
the shallow frosted-glass bowl of the light fixture. And, sure enough, there it was.
Carefully, he reached in, plucked up the tiny item between his fingertips. He climbed
down and showed it to her in the palm of his hand.
"What—?" She broke off at the emphatic shake of his head.
"Do you have a pair of pliers?" he asked.
Again, the curious look as she opened the door of a shallow closet. She handed him the
pliers. He put the tiny square between the ribbed ends, squeezed. The square shattered.
"It's a miniature electronic transmitter," he said.
"What?" Curiosity had turned to bewilderment.

"That's why the man on the roof broke in here, to plant this in the light fixture. He was
listening as well as looking."
She looked around the cozy room and shivered. "Dear God, I'll never again feel the
same way about this place." Then she turned to Bourne. "What does he want? Why try to
record our every move?" Then she snorted. "It's Dr. Schiffer, isn't it?"
"It may be," Bourne said, "I don't know." All at once, he became dizzy and, near to
blacking out, half-fell, half-sat on the sofa.
Annaka hurried to the bathroom to get him disinfectant and some bandages. He put his
head back against the cushions, clearing his mind of everything that had just happened.
He had to center himself, maintain his concentration, keeping his eye firmly fixed on
what had to be done next.
Annaka returned from the bathroom carrying a tray on which were a shallow porcelain
bowl of hot water, a sponge, some towels, an ice pack, a bottle of disinfectant and a glass
of water.
"Jason?"
He opened his eyes.
She gave him the glass of water, and when he had drained it, she handed him the ice
pack. "Your cheek is starting to swell."
He put the pack against his face, felt the pain slowly recede into numbness. But when
he took a quick breath, his side seized up as he twisted to put the empty glass on a side
table. He turned back slowly, stiffly. He was thinking of Joshua, who had been
resurrected in his mind if not in reality. Maybe that was why he was so filled with blind
rage at Khan, for Khan had raised the specter of the awful past, thrusting into the light a
ghost so dear to David Webb he had haunted him in both his personalities.
Watching Annaka as she cleaned his face of dried blood, he recalled their brief
exchange at the cafe when he brought up the subject of her father and she had broken
down, and yet he knew that he had it pursue it. He was a father who'd violently lost his
family. She was a daughter who'd violently lost her father.
"Annaka," he began gently, "I know it's a painful subject for you, but I'd very much
like to know about your father." He felt her stiffen, plowed on. "Can you talk about him?"
"What d'you want to know? How he and Alexsei met, I suppose."
She concentrated on what she was doing, but he wondered whether she was
deliberately not meeting his gaze.
"I was thinking more along the lines of your relationship with him."
A shadow flickered across her face. "That's an odd—and intimate— question to ask."
"It's my past, you see ..." Bourne's voice trailed off. He was unable either to lie or to
tell the full truth.
"The one you remember only in glimmers." She nodded. "I see." When she wrung out
the sponge, the water in the bowl turned pink. "Ah, well, Janos Vadas was the perfect
father. He changed me when I was an infant, read to me at night, sang to me when I was
ill. He was there for all my birthdays and special occasions. Honestly, I don't know how
he managed it." She wrung out the sponge a second time; he'd begun bleeding again. "I
came first. Always. And he never grew tired of telling me how much he loved me."

"What a lucky child you were."
"Luckier than any of my friends, luckier than anyone I know." She was concentrating
harder than ever, trying to get the bleeding to stop.
Bourne had sunk into a state of semi-trance, thinking about Joshua— about the rest of
his first family—and all the things he would never get to do with them, all the many tiny
moments you noted and remembered as your child grew up.
At length, she stanched the flow of blood and now took a peek under the ice pack. Her
expression didn't betray what she saw. She sat back on her haunches, hands resting in her
lap.
"I think you should take off your jacket and shirt."
He stared at her.
"So we can take a look at your ribs. I saw you wince when you twisted to put the glass
down."
She held out her hand and he dropped the ice pack into it. She juggled it a little. "This
needs a refill."
When she returned, he was naked to the waist. A frighteningly large red welt on his left
side was already puffed up and very tender as his fingertips probed it.
"My God, you need an ice bath" she exclaimed.
"At least nothing's broken."
She tossed him the ice pack. He gasped involuntarily as he put it against the swelling.
She returned to her haunches, her gaze roving over him once again. He wished he knew
what she was thinking.
"I suppose you can't help remembering the son who was killed so young."
He gritted his teeth. "It's just that... The man on the roof—the one spying on us—has
been following me all the way from the States. He says he wants to kill me, but I know
he's lying. He wants me to lead him to someone, that's why he's been spying on us."
Annaka's expression darkened. "Who does he want to get to?"
"A man named Spalko."
She registered surprise. "Stepan Spalko?"
"That's right. Do you know him?"
"Of course I know of him," she said. "Everyone in Hungary does. He's the head of
Humanistas, Ltd., the worldwide relief organization." She frowned. "Jason, now I'm truly
worried. This man's dangerous. If he's trying to get to Mr. Spalko, we should contact the
authorities."
He shook his head. "What would we tell them? That we think a man we know only as
Khan wants to contact Stepan Spalko? We don't even know why. And what d'you think
they'll say? Why doesn't this Khan just pick up the telephone and call him?"
"Then we should at least call someone at Humanistas."
"Annaka, until I know what's going on, I don't want to contact anyone. It'll only muddy
waters that are already clouded with questions for which I don't have any answers."
He rose, made his way to the escritoire, sat down in front of her laptop. "I told you I
had an idea. Is it okay if I use your computer?"

"By all means," she said, rising.
As Bourne turned on the machine, she gathered up the bowl, sponge and other
paraphernalia, padded into the kitchen. He heard the sound of running water as he went
online. He accessed the U.S. Government net, went from site to site, and by the time she
returned, he'd found the one he needed.
The Agency had a whole raft of public sites, accessible to anyone with an Internet
connection, but there were a dozen other sites, encrypted, password protected, that were
part of the CIA's fabled intranet.
Annaka registered his extreme concentration. "What is it?" She came around and stood
behind him. In a moment, her eyes opened wide. "What the hell are you doing?"
"Just what it looks like," Bourne said, "I'm hacking into the CIA main database."
"Buthowd'you—"
"Don't ask," Bourne said as his fingers flew over the keyboard. "Trust me, you don't
want to know."
Alex Conklin had always known the way through the front door, but that was because
he'd had the updated ciphers delivered to him at six a.m. every Monday morning. It had
been Deron, the artist and master forger, who'd taught Bourne the fine art of hacking into
U.S Government databases. In his business, it was a necessary skill.
The problem was that the CIA firewall—the software program designed to keep their
data secure—was a particular bitch. In addition to its keyword changing every week, it
had a floating algorithm tied into the keyword. But Deron had shown Bourne the way to
fool the system into thinking you had the keyword when you didn't, so that the program
itself would supply it for you.
The way to attack the firewall was through the algorithm, which was a derivation of
the core algorithm that encrypted the CIA's central files. Bourne knew this formula
because Deron had made him memorize it.
Bourne navigated to the CIA site, where a window popped up in which he was asked
to type the current keyword. In this, he typed in the algorithm, which contained a much
larger string of numbers and letters than the box was designed to take. On the other hand,
after the first three sets of the components, the underlying program recognized it for what
it was, and for a moment it was stymied. The trick, Deron had said, was to complete the
algorithm before the program figured out what you were doing and shut down, denying
you access. The formula string was very long; there was no room for error or even for an
instant's hesitation, and Bourne began to sweat because he couldn't believe the software
could remain frozen for this long.
In the end, however, he finished entering the algorithm without the program shutting
down. The window disappeared, the screen changed.
"I'm inside," Bourne said.
"Pure alchemy," Annaka whispered, fascinated.
Bourne was navigating to the Tactical Non-Lethal Weapons Directorate site. He
plugged in Schiffer's name but was disappointed in the sparse material that came up.
Nothing on what Schiffer was working on, nothing about his background. In fact, if

Bourne didn't know better, he could believe that Dr. Felix Schiffer was a minor scientist
of no import whatsoever to the TNLWD.
There was another possibility. He used the back-channel hack that Deron had made
him memorize, the same one Conklin had used to keep tabs on events occurring behind
the scenes at the Department of Defense.
Once in, he went to the DARPA site and navigated to the Archives. Lucky for him the
government computer jockeys were notoriously slow at cleaning out old files. There was
Schiffer's, which contained some background. He was MIT-trained, was given his own
lab right out of grad school by one of the large pharmaceutical firms. He lasted there less
than a year, but when he left, he took with him another of their scientists, Dr. Peter Sido,
with whom he worked for five years before being recruited by the government and
entering DARPA. No explanation was given for his giving up a private position to go into
the public sector, but some scientists were like that. They were as unfit for living in
society as many prisoners who, when they'd served their time, committed another crime
the minute they hit the street, simply to be sent back into a clearly defined world where
everything was taken care of for them.
Bourne read on and discovered that Schiffer had been attached to the Defense Sciences
Office which, ominously, trafficked in bio-weapons systems. In his time at DARPA, Dr.
Schiffer had been working in a way to biologically "cleanse" a room infected with
anthrax.
Bourne paged through, but he couldn't find any more details. What bothered Bourne
was that this piece of information wouldn't account for Conklin's intense interest.
Annaka looked over his shoulder. "Is there any clue we could use to find out where Dr.
Schiffer might be hiding?"
"I don't think so, no."
"All right then." She squeezed his shoulders. "The cupboard's bare and we both need to
eat something."
"I think I'd rather stay here, if you don't mind, rest up a bit."
"You're right. You're in no shape to wander outside." She smiled as she drew on her
coat. "I'll just pop around the corner, get us some food. Anything you particularly want?"
He shook his head, watched her head for the door. "Annaka, be careful."
She turned, pulled her gun partway out of her bag. "Don't worry, I'll be fine." She
opened the door. "See you in a few minutes."
He heard her depart, but he'd already returned his attention to the computer screen. He
felt his heart rate increase and tried to calm himself, without success. Even full of intent,
he hesitated. He knew he had to go on, but he also recognized that he was terrified.
Watching his hands as if they belong to someone else, he spent the next five minutes
hacking his way through the U.S. Army firewall. At one point, he hit a glitch. The
military IT team had upgraded the firewall recently, adding a third layer Deron either
hadn't told him about or, more likely, hadn't yet seen. His fingers rose up like Annaka's
over the piano keyboard and for a moment they hesitated. It was not too late to turn back,
he told himself, there'd be no shame in doing that. For years he'd felt that anything to do
with his first family, including the record of them held in the U.S. Army databanks was
for him strictly off-limits. He was already tortured enough by their deaths, haunted by the

racking guilt that he'd been unable to save them, that he'd been safe at a meeting while
the diving jet sent its killing bullets into them. He couldn't help torturing himself anew,
conjuring up their last terror-filled minutes. Dao, a child of war, would, of course, have
heard the jet engines droning lazily in the hot summer sky. At first she wouldn't have
seen it coming out of the white sun, but when its roar grew closer, when its metal bulk
became larger than the sun, she would've known. Even while horror gripped her heart,
she would've tried to gather her children to her in a vain attempt to protect them from the
bullets that would have already begun to pock the surface of the muddy river. "Joshua!
Alyssa! Come to me!" she would've screamed, as if she could save them from what was to
come.
Bourne, sitting in front of Annaka's computer, became aware that he was weeping. For
a moment he allowed the tears to flow freely as they hadn't done for so many years. Then
he shook himself, wiped his cheeks with his sleeve and, before he had a chance to change
his mind, got on with the business at hand.
He found a work-around for the final level of the firewall, and five minutes after
beginning the excruciating work, he was logged in. At once, before his nerve could fail
again, he navigated to the Death Record Archives, typed in the names and date of death
in the required data fields for Dao Webb, Alyssa Webb, Joshua Webb. He stared at the
names, thinking, This was my family, flesh-and-blood human beings who laughed and
cried, and who once held me, who called me "Darling" and "Daddy." Now what were
they? Names on a computer screen. Statistics in a databank. His heart was breaking and
he felt again that touch of madness that had afflicted him in the first aftermath of their
deaths. I can't feel this again, he thought. It'll tear me apart. Full of a sorrow he found
unsupportable, he punched the "Enter" key. He had no other choice; he could not go back.
Never go back, that had been his motto from the moment Alex Conklin had recruited him,
turned him into another David Webb and then into Jason Bourne. Then why was it he
could still hear their voices? "Darling, I've missed you!" "Daddy, you're home!"
These memories, reaching across the permeable barrier of time, had ensnared them in
their web, which was why he did not at first react to what had come up on the screen. He
stared at it for several minutes without seeing the terrible anomaly.
He saw in horrifying detail what he'd hoped he'd never see, the photos of his beloved
wife Dao, shoulders and chest riddled with bullets, her face grotesquely disfigured by the
traumatic wounds. On the second page he saw the photos of Alyssa, her poor body and
her head even more disfigured because of their vulnerability, their smaller size. He sat,
paralyzed with grief and horror, at what lay before him. He had to go on. One page left,
one last set of photos to complete the tragedy.
He scrolled to the third page, bracing himself for the photos of Joshua. Only there
weren't any.
Stupefied, he did nothing for a moment. At first, he thought there had been a computer
glitch, that he'd been inadvertently directed to another page in the Archives. But, no,
there was the name: Joshua Webb. But below it were words that seared through Bourne's
consciousness like a hot needle. "Three articles of clothing, listed below, one shoe, partial
(sole and heel missing) found ten meters from the corpses of Dao and Alyssa Webb.
After an hour's search, Joshua Webb declared dead. NBF."

NBF. The Army acronym screamed out to him. No Body Found. Bourne was gripped
by an icy cold. They searched for Joshua for an hour—only an hour? And why hadn't
they told him? He'd buried three coffins, his mind excoriated with grief, remorse, and
guilt. And all the while they knew, the bastards knewl He sat back. His face was white,
his hands trembling. In his heart, he felt a rage he could not contain.
He thought of Joshua; he thought of Khan.
His mind was ablaze, overcome by the horror of the terrible possibility that he'd buried
from the moment he'd seen the carved stone Buddha around Khan's neck: What if Khan
really was Joshua? If so, he'd become a killing machine, a monster. Bourne knew only
too well how easy it was to find the path to madness and killing in the jungles of
Southeast Asia. But there was, of course, another possibility, one his mind quite naturally
gravitated toward and held onto: that the plot to plant Joshua was far more wide-ranging
and complex than he'd at first considered. If so, if these records were forged, the
conspiracy went all the way up to the highest levels of American government. But, oddly,
filling his mind with the usual conspiratorial suspicions only increased his sense of
dislocation.
In his mind's eye, he saw Khan holding out the carved stone Buddha, heard him say,
"You gave this one to me—yes, you did. And then you abandoned me to die..."
Abruptly, Bourne's gorge rose into his throat and, with his stomach rebelling madly, he
launched himself off the sofa, across the room, and, ignoring the pain, ran to the
bathroom, where he vomited every last thing left inside him.
In the OpSit room deep in the bowels of CIA HQ, the duty officer, watching a
computer screen, picked up the phone and dialed a specific number. He waited a moment
while an automated voice said, "Speak." The DO asked for the DCI. His voice was
analyzed, matched against the list of duty officers. The call was switched, a male voice
said, "Hold, please." A moment later the clear baritone of the DCI came on the line.
"I thought you should know, sir, that an internal alarm has been tripped. Someone got
through the military firewall and accessed death records for the following personnel: Dao
Webb, Alyssa Webb, Joshua Webb."
There was a short, unpleasant pause. "Webb, son. You're sure it's Webb''
The sudden urgency in the DCI's voice brought out the sweat on the young duty
officer's face. "Yessir." "Where's this hacker located?" "Budapest, sir."
"Did the alarm do its job? Did it capture the full IP address?" "Yessir. 106-108 Fo
utca."
In his office the DCI smiled grimly. Totally by coincidence, he'd been leafing through
Martin Lindros' latest report. It seemed as if the Frogs had now sifted through all the
remains of the accident that was supposed to have killed Jason Bourne without finding a
trace of human remains. Not even a molar. So there'd been no definitive confirmation that,
despite the Quai d'Orsay officer's eyewitness account, Bourne was actually dead. The
DCI's hand clenched into a fist and pounded the desk in anger. Bourne had eluded them
again. But despite his ire and frustration, part of him wasn't all that surprised. After all,
Bourne had been trained by the best spook the Agency had ever produced. How many

times had Alex Conklin faked his own death in the field, though perhaps never in such
spectacular fashion.
Of course, the DCI thought, it was always possible that someone other than Jason
Bourne had hacked through the U.S. Army firewall in order to get at the moldy death
records of a woman and her two children who weren't even military personnel and who
were known to only a small handful of people still living. But what were the odds?
No, he thought now with mounting excitement, Bourne hadn't perished in that
explosion outside Paris; he was alive and well in Budapest—why there?—and for once
he'd made a mistake they could capitalize on. Why he was interested in the death records
of his first family the DCI had no idea, nor did he care beyond the fact that Bourne's
inquisitiveness had opened the door for finally fulfilling the sanction.
The DCI reached for the phone. He could have assigned the task to a subordinate, but
he wanted to fed the joy of ordering this particular sanction himself. He dialed an
overseas number, thinking, I've got you now, you sonuvabitch.

CHAPTER TWENTY
For a city founded in the late nineteenth century as a British railroad camp on the
Mombasa-to-Uganda line, Nairobi had a depressingly banal skyline filled with sleek
modern high-rises. It lay on a flat plain, grasslands that for many years had been the
home to the Masai before the coming of Western civilization. It was currently the fastestgrowing city in East Africa and, as such, was subject to the usual growing pains as well
as the disorienting sight of the old and the new, vast wealth and abject poverty
uncomfortably rubbing flanks until sparks flew, tempers flared, and calm needed to be
restored. With unemployment high, riots were commonplace as well as late-night
muggings, especially in and around Uhuru Park to the west of City Center.
None of these inconveniences were of any interest to the party just arriving from
Wilson Airport in a pair of armored limousines, although the occupants noted the signs
warning of violence and the private security guards that patrolled City Center and west,
where government ministries and foreign embassies resided, as well as along the fringes
of Latema and River Roads. They passed along the edge of the bazaar, where virtually
every sort of surplus war materiel, from flame-throwers to tanks to shoulder-mounted
ground-to-air missile launchers were on display for sale next to cheap gingham dresses
and woven textiles in colorful tribal patterns.
Spalko was in the lead limousine with Hasan Arsenov. Behind them, in the second car,
sat Zina and Magomet and Akhmet, two of Arsenov's most senior lieutenants. These men
hadn't bothered to shave their thick curling beards. They wore the traditional black outfits
and stared at Zina's Western clothes with stupefaction. She smiled at them, studying their
expressions carefully for any sign of change.
"Everything's in readiness, Shaykh," Arsenov said. "My people are perfectly trained
and prepared. They are fluent in Icelandic; they have memorized both the hotel's
schematics and the procedures you outlined. They await only my final order of
commencement."

Spalko, staring out at the passing Nairobi parade of natives and foreigners stained red
by the setting sun, smiled, if only to himself. "Do I detect a note of skepticism in your
voice?"
"If you do," Arsenov said quickly, "it's only from my acute sense of anticipation. I've
been waiting all my life for the chance to be free of the Russian yoke. My people have
been outcasts too long; they've been waiting for centuries to be welcomed into the
community of Islam."
Spalko nodded abstractedly. For him, Arsenov's opinion had already become irrelevant;
the moment he was thrown to the wolves he'd cease to exist altogether.
That evening the five of them convened in a private dining room Spalko had booked
on the top floor of the 360 Hotel on Kenyatta Avenue. It, like their rooms, had a view
over the city to Nairobi National Park, stocked with giraffes, wildebeest, Thomson's
gazelles and rhinos—as well as lions, leopards and water buffalo. During the dinner there
was no talk of business, no hint at all as to their purpose here.
After the plates had been cleared, it was a different story. A team from Hu-manistas,
Ltd., that had preceded them to Nairobi had set up a computer-based audiovideo hookup,
which was wheeled into the room. A screen was deployed and Spalko commenced to
give a Powerpoint presentation, showing the coast of Iceland, the city of Reykjavik and
its environs, then aerial views of the Oskjuhlid Hotel, followed by photos outside and
inside the hotel. "There's the HVAC system, which as you can see here and here has been
fitted with state-of-the-art motion detectors as well as infrared heat sensors," he said.
"And here's the control panel, which like every system in the hotel has a security override,
electrical in nature but with battery backups." He continued, running through the plan in
the most minute detail, beginning with the moment they arrived and ending with the
moment they left. Everything had been planned for; everything was in readiness.
"Tomorrow morning at sunrise," he said, standing, and the others stood with him. "La
illaha illAUahr "La illaha ill Allah" the others chorused in solemn reply.
Late at night Spalko lay in bed smoking. One lamp was on, but he was still able to see
the glittering lights of the city and, beyond, the forested darkness of the wildlife park. He
appeared lost in thought, but in reality he had cleared his mind. He was waiting.
Akhmed heard the distant roaring of the animals and could not sleep. He sat up in bed,
rubbed his eyes with the heels of his hands. It was unusual for him not to sleep soundly
and he wasn't certain what to do. For a time he lay back down, but he was awake now and,
aware of the pounding of his heart, his eyes would not close.
He thought of the impending day and the full flower of its promise. Allah will that it be
the start of a new dawn for us, he prayed.
Sighing, he sat up, swung his legs over the side of the bed and rose. He pulled on the
odd Western trousers and shirt, wondering if he'd ever get used to them. Allah grant not.
He was just opening the door to his room when he saw Zina passing by. She walked
with an uncanny grace, moving silently, her hips swaying provocatively. Often, he'd
licked his lips when she passed near him and he'd find himself trying to inhale as much of
her scent as he could.

He peered out. She was headed away from her room; he wondered where she was
going. A moment later he had his answer. His eyes opened wide as she rapped softly on
the Shaykh's door, which opened to reveal the Shakyh. Perhaps he had summoned her for
some lapse in discipline Akhmed was not aware of.
Then she said in a tone of voice he'd never heard her use before, "Hasan's asleep," and
he understood everything.
When the soft knock sounded on his door, Spalko turned, stubbed out his cigarette,
then rose, padded across the large room and opened the door.
Zina stood in the hallway. "Hasan's asleep," she said as if she was required to explain
her presence.
Without a word, Spalko stepped back, and she came in, closing the door softly. He
grabbed her, then spun her onto the bed. Within moments she was crying out, her bare
flesh slick with their fluids. Their lovemaking contained a certain wildness, as if they had
come at last to the end of the world. And when it was over, it wasn't over at all, for she
lay astride him, stroking and caressing him, whispering her desires in the most explicit
terms until, inflamed, he took her again.
Afterward she lay entwined with him, smoke curling from her half-open lips. The lamp
was off, and solely by the pinpoint lights of the Nairobi night, she held him in her gaze.
Ever since he had first touched her, she had longed to know him. She knew nothing of his
background—to her knowledge, no one did. If he would talk to her, if he would tell her
the little secrets of his life, she'd know that he was bound to her as she was bound to him.
She ran her fingertip around the shell of his ear, across the unnaturally smooth skin of
his cheek. "I want to know what happened," she said softly. Spalko's eyes came slowly
back into focus. "It was a long time ago." "All the more reason to tell me."
He turned his head, stared into her eyes. "Do you really want to know?" "Very much,
yes."
He took a breath, let it out. "In those days, my younger brother and I were living in
Moscow. He was always getting into trouble, not that he could help it; he had an addict's
disposition." "Drugs?"
"Praise Allah, no. In his case, it was gambling. He couldn't stop betting, even when
he'd run out of money. He'd borrow from me, and of course I'd always give him the
money because he'd spin a story I chose to believe."
He turned in her arms, shook out a cigarette, lit it. "Anyway, there came a time when
the plausibility of the stories faltered, or possibly even I could no longer afford to believe
him. In any event, I said, 'No more,' believing, again foolishly as it turned out, that he'd
stop." He drew smoke deep into his lungs, let it out with a hiss. "But he didn't. So what
d'you suppose he did? He went to the last people he should've approached, because they
were the only ones who'd lend him money." "The mob."
He nodded. "That's right. He took the money from them knowing that if he lost he'd
never be able to pay them back. He knew what they'd do to him, but as I said, he couldn't
help himself. He bet and, as almost always happened, he lost."
"And?" She was on tenterhooks, begging him to go on.
"They waited for him to pay them back, and when he didn't, they came after him."

Spalko stared at the glowing end of his cigarette. The windows were open. Over the
low noise of the traffic and the clattering of the palm fronds, now and again came an
animal's booming roar or unearthly howl. "At first they gave him a beating," he said, his
voice barely above a whisper. "Nothing too severe because at that point they still
assumed he'd come up with the money. When they realized he had nothing and could get
nothing, they pursued him in earnest, shot him in the street like a dog."
He was finished with his cigarette, but he let the butt burn down to where he gripped it
between two fingers. He seemed to have forgotten all about it. Beside him, Zina said not
a word, so held in thrall was she by his story.
"Six months went by," he said, flicking the butt across the room and out the window. "I
did my homework; I paid the people who needed to be paid, and at last I got my chance.
It happened that the boss who'd ordered my brother killed went to the barbershop at the
Metropole Hotel every week."
"Don't tell me," Zina said, "you posed as his barber, and when he sat in your chair, you
slit his throat with a straight razor."
He stared at her for a moment, then he broke into a laugh. "That's very good, very
cinematic." He shook his head. "But in real life it wouldn't work. The boss had used the
same barber for fifteen years and in all that time he'd never accepted a substitute." He
leaned in, kissed her on the mouth. "Don't be disappointed; take it as a lesson and learn
from it." He slipped his arm around her, drew her close against him. Somewhere in the
park a leopard yowled.
"No, I waited until he was freshly shaved and barbered, relaxed from these tender
ministrations. I waited for him in the street outside the Metro-pole, a place so public only
a madman would choose it. When he came out, I shot him and his bodyguards dead."
"And then you escaped."
"In a sense," he said. "That day I escaped, but six months later, in another city in
another country a Molotov cocktail was thrown at me from a passing car."
She tenderly ran her fingers over his plasticized flesh. "I like you this way, imperfect.
The pain you endured makes you ... heroic."
Spalko said nothing, and at length he felt her breathing deepen as she drifted off to
sleep. Of course, not a word he'd said was true, though he had to admit it made a good
story—very cinematic! The truth—what was the truth? He scarcely knew anymore; he'd
spent so much time carefully constructing his elaborate facade that there were days when
he became lost in his own fiction. In any event, he'd never reveal the truth to anyone else
because it would put him at a disadvantage. When people knew you, they thought they
owned you—that the truth you had shared with them in a moment of weakness they
called intimacy would bind you to them.
In this Zina was like all the rest, and he found the bitter rind of disappointment in his
mouth. But then he was always being disappointed by others. They simply weren't in his
sphere; they couldn't understand the nuances of the world as he did.
They were amusing for a while, but only for a while. He took this thought with him
down into the bottomless chasm of a deep and untroubled sleep, and when he awoke,
Zina was gone, returned to the side of the unsuspecting Hasan Arsenov.

At dawn, the five of them piled into a brace of Range Rovers, which had been
provisioned and were driven by members of the Humanistas team, and headed south out
of the city toward the great unwashed slum that extended like an festering canker on the
flank of Nairobi. No one spoke and they had eaten only lightly, for a pall of hideous
tension gripped them all, even Spalko.
Though the morning was clear, a toxic haze hung low over the sprawling slum, ready
evidence of the lack of proper sanitation and the ever-present specter of cholera. There
were ramshackle structures, mean tin and cardboard huts, some wooden ones, as well as
squat concrete buildings that could have been mistaken for bunkers except for the zigzag
lines of laundry strung outside, flapping in the gritty air. As well, there were mounds of
bulldozed earth, raw and enigmatic until the passing party saw the scorched and
charcoaled remains of fire-gutted dwellings, shoes with their soles burned off, tatters of a
blue dress. These few artifacts, evidence of recent history, which was all that existed here,
lent a particularly forlorn aspect to the ugliness of the grinding poverty. If there was a life
to be had here, it was fitful, chaotic, dismal beyond either word or thought. All were
struck by the sense of a terminal night that existed here even in the light of a new
morning. There was a fatedness to the sprawl that made them recall the bazaar, the black
market nature of the city's economy they felt was in some obscure way responsible for
the depressing landscape through which they crawled, slowed by the thick crowds that
overflowed the cracked sidewalks out into the rutted dirt streets. Traffic lights didn't exist,
even if they had, the party would have been stopped by hordes of stinking beggars or
merchants hawking their pathetic wares.
At length they arrived at more or less the center of the slum, where they entered a
gutted two-story building reeking of smoke. Ash was everywhere inside, white and soft
as ground bones. The drivers brought in the provisions, which were contained in what
appeared to be two rectangular steamer trucks.
Inside were silver-skinned HAZMAT suits which, at Spalko's direction, they donned.
The suits contained their own self-contained breathing systems. Spalko then removed the
NX 20 from its case inside one of the trunks, carefully fitted the two pieces together as
the four Chechen rebels gathered around to watch. Handing it to Hasan Arsenov for a
moment, Spalko drew out the small, heavy box given to him by Dr. Peter Sido. With
great care, he unlocked it. They all stared down at the glass vial. It was so small, so
deadly. Their breathing slowed, grew labored, as if they were already afraid to draw
breath.
Spalko directed Arsenov to hold the NX 20 at arm's length. He flipped open a titanium
panel on top, placed the vial into the loading chamber. The NX 20 couldn't be fired yet,
he explained. Dr. Schiffer had built in a number of safeguards against accidental or
premature dispersal. He pointed out the airtight seal that, with the chamber full, would be
activated when he closed and locked the top panel. He did this now, then he took the NX
20 from Arsenov and led them up the interior flight of stairs, still standing, despite the
ravages of the fire, only because it was made of concrete.
On the second floor they crowded against a window. Like all the others in the building,
its glass had been shattered; all that was left was the frame. Through it, they watched the
halt and the lame, the famine-stricken, the diseased. Flies buzzed, a three-legged dog
squatted and defecated in an open-air market where used goods were piled in the dust. A

child ran naked through the street, crying. An old woman hunching along, hawked and
spat.
These sights were of only peripheral interest to the party. They were studying Spalko's
every move, listening to his every word with a concentration that bordered on the
compulsive. The mathematical precision of the weapon worked like a magical counterspell to the disease that seemed to have conjured itself into the air.
Spalko showed them the two triggers on the NX 20—a small one just forward of the
larger one. The small one, he told them, injected the payload from the loading chamber
into the firing chamber. Once that, too, was sealed by pressing this button, here, on the
left side of weapon, the NX 20 was ready to be fired. He pulled the small trigger, then
pressed the button, and could feel within the weapon a slight stirring, the first intimation
of death.
The muzzle of the thing was blunt and ugly, but its bluntness was practical as well.
Unlike conventional weapons, the NX 20 needed only to be aimed in the most general
way, he pointed out. He stuck the muzzle through the window. They all held their breath
as his finger curled around the large trigger.
Outside, life went on in its random, disorderly fashion. A young man held a bowl of
maize-meal porridge under his chin, scooping up the glop with the first two fingers of his
right hand while a group of half-starved people watched with unnaturally large eyes. An
impossibly thin girl on a bicycle passed by and a pair of toothless old men stared at the
packed earth of the street as if reading there the sad story of their lives.
It was no more than a soft hiss, at least that was how it sounded to each of them secure
and safe inside their HAZMAT suits. There was, otherwise, no outward sign of the
dispersal. This was as Dr. Schiffer had predicted.
The party watched tensely as the seconds ticked by with agonizing slowness. Every
sense seemed heightened. They heard the sonorous tolling of their own pulse in their ears,
felt the heavy beat of their hearts. They found that they were holding their breath.
Dr. Schiffer had said that within three minutes they would see the first signs that the
disperser had worked properly. It was more or less the last thing he'd said before Spalko
and Zina had dropped his near-lifeless body down into the labyrinth.
Spalko, who'd been following the second hand of his watch as it swept toward the
three-minute mark, now looked up. He was riveted by what he saw. A dozen people had
dropped before the first scream sounded. It was quickly choked off, but others took up
the ululating cry, only to drop, writhing, in the street. Chaos and silence as death crept
outward in a gathering spiral. There was no hiding from it, no way to avoid it, and no one
escaped, even those who tried to run.
He signed to the Chechens and they followed him down the concrete stairs. The drivers
were ready and waiting as Spalko broke down the NX 20. The moment he stowed it, they
snapped closed the trunks, brought them out to the waiting Range Rovers.
The party took a tour of the street, then the adjacent ones. They walked four blocks in
every direction, always seeing the same result. Death and dying, more death and dying.
They returned to the vehicles, the taste of triumph in their mouths. The Range Rovers
started up the moment they were settled and took them over the entire area of the half-

mile-square radius Dr. Schiffer had told Spalko was the NX 20's dispersal range. Spalko
was gratified to see that the doctor had neither lied nor exaggerated.
By the time the payload had run its course an hour from now, how many people would
be dead or dying? he wondered. He'd stopped counting after a thousand, but he guessed it
would be three times that amount, perhaps as much as five times.
Before they left the city of the dead, he gave the order and his drivers started the fires,
using a potent accelerant. Immediately, sheets of flame flicked skyward, spreading
quickly.
The fire was good to see. It would cover what had happened here this morning, for no
one must know, not, at least until after their mission at the Reykjavik summit was
completed.
In just forty-eight hours it would be, Spalko thought, exultant. Nothing could stop them.
Now the world is mine.

BOOK THREE

CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE
"I think there may be internal bleeding," Annaka said, looking again at the deeply
discolored swelling of Bourne's side. "We've got to get you to the hospital."
"You must be joking," he said. Indeed, the pain was much worse; every time he
breathed, he felt as if a couple of ribs had been staved in. But a trip to the hospital was
out of the question; he was a wanted man.
"All right," she conceded. "A doctor, then." And raised a hand, anticipating his
objection. "My father's friend, Istvan, is discreet. My father used him from time to time
without consequence."
Bourne shook his head, said, "Go to a pharmacy if you must, nothing more."
Before he had a chance to change his mind, Annaka grabbed her coat and purse,
promising to be back shortly.
In a way he was glad to be rid of her temporarily, he needed to be alone with his
thoughts. Curled up on the sofa, he drew the eiderdown closer around him. His mind
seemed to be on fire. He was convinced that Dr. Schiffer was the key. He had to find him,
for once he did, he'd find the person who had ordered Alex and Mo's murders, the person
who had set him up. The problem was Bourne was quite certain he didn't have much time
left. Schiffer had been missing for some time now. Molnar had been dead two days. If, as
Bourne feared, he'd disclosed Schiffer's whereabouts under articulated interrogation, then
Bourne would have to assume that Schiffer was by now in enemy hands, which would
mean that the enemy also had in his possession whatever it was that Schiffer had invented,

some sort of biological weapon, code-named NX 20, to which Leonard Fine, Conklin's
conduit, had reacted so strongly when he'd mentioned it.
Who was the enemy? The only name he had was Stepan Spalko, an internationally
renowned humanitarian. And yet, according to Khan, Spalko was the man who had
ordered the murders of Alex and Mo and had set Bourne up as the murderer. Khan could
be lying, and why not? If he wanted to get to Spalko for his own reasons, he'd hardly
announce them to Bourne. Khan!
The very thought of him caused Bourne to be flooded with unwanted emotion. With
effort, he concentrated on his rage against his own government. They'd lied to him—
colluded in a coverup to keep him from the truth. Why? What were they trying to hide?
Did they believe that Joshua might be alive? If so, why wouldn't they want him to know?
What was it they were doing? He pressed his hands to his head. His vision seemed to lose
its perspective—things that had seemed close at hand a moment ago now appeared far
away. He thought he might be losing his mind. With an inarticulate cry, he threw the
eiderdown off him and rose, ignoring the flash of pain in his side as he stalked to where
he'd hidden his ceramic gun beneath his jacket. He took it up in his hand. Unlike the
reassuring heft of a steel gun, this was as light as a feather. He held it by the grips, curled
his forefinger through the trigger guard. He stared at it a long time, as if through sheer
force of will he could conjure up the officials buried deep inside the military responsible
for deciding not to tell him that they'd never found Joshua's body, deciding it was simply
easier to declare that he'd been killed when they didn't know for a fact if he was actually
dead or alive.
Slowly the pain returned, a universe of agony with every breath he took, forcing him to
return to the sofa, where he once again wrapped himself in the eiderdown. And in the
quiet of the apartment, the thought, unbidden, came again: What if Khan was telling the
truth—what if he was Joshua? And the answer, terrible and unalterable: Then he was an
assassin, a brutal murderer without remorse or guilt, utterly disconnected from any
human emotion.
All at once Jason Bourne put his head down, as close to tears as he'd ever been since
Alex Conklin had created him decades ago.
When Kevin McColl had been assigned the Bourne sanction, he'd been on top of Ilona,
a young Hungarian woman of his acquaintance, as uninhibited as she was athletic. She
could do wonderful things with her legs, was, in fact, doing them when the call came in.
As it happened, he and Ilona were in the Kiraly Turkish Baths on Fo utca. It being
Saturday, a woman's day, she'd had to sneak him in, which, he had to admit, had been
part of the excitement. Like everyone else in his position, he'd very quickly gotten used to
living beyond the law—to being the law.
With a grunt of frustration, he unwound himself from her and picked up his cell phone.
There was no question of not answering it when it rang it was for a sanction. He listened
without comment to the voice of the DCI on the other end of the line. He'd have to go
now. The sanction was urgent, the target within range.
And so, as he wistfully watched the gleam of Ilona's sweat-slicked skin in the jeweltoned light reflected off the mosaic tiles, he began to dress. He was a huge man, with the
physique of a Midwestern football lineman and a flat imperturbable face. He was

obsessed with weight training, and it showed. His muscles rippled with every move he
made.
"I'm not finished," Ilona said, her huge dark eyes drinking him in.
"Neither am I," McColl said, leaving her where she lay.
Two jets stood on the tarmac of Nairobi's Nelson Airport. Both belonged to Stepan
Spalko; both had the logo of Humanistas, Ltd. on fuselage and tail. Spalko had flown in
from Budapest on the first one. The second had been used by his Humanistas support
staff, who were now inside the jet that would return him to Budapest. The other jet would
be taking Arsenov and Zina to Iceland where they'd be rendezvousing with the rest of the
terrorist cadre flying in from Chechnya by way of Helsinki.
Spalko stood facing Arsenov. Zina was a pace behind Arsenov's left shoulder. He, no
doubt, thought her position one of deference, but Spalko knew better. Her eyes smoldered
as she drank in the Shaykh.
"You've lived up to the letter of your promise, Shaykh," Arsenov said. "The weapon
will bring us victory in Reykjavik, of that there can be no question."
Spalko nodded. "Soon you'll have everything that's due you."
"The depth of our gratitude seems quite inadequate."
"You don't give yourself enough credit, Hasan." Spalko drew out a leather briefcase,
unlocked it. "Passports, ID tags, maps, diagrams, the latest photos, everything you need."
He handed over the contents. "The rendezvous with the boat will be at three-hundred
hours tomorrow." He looked at Arsenov. "May Allah lend you strength and courage. May
Allah guide your mailed fist."
As Arsenov turned away, preoccupied with his precious cargo, Zina said, "May our
next meeting lead to a great future, Shaykh."
Spalko smiled. "The past will die," he said, speaking volumes with his eyes, "in order
to make way for that great future."
Zina, laughing to herself in silent pleasure, followed Hasan Arsenov as he mounted the
metal ladder into the jet.
Spalko watched the door close behind them, then he crossed to his jet, waiting
patiently on the tarmac. He pulled out his cell phone, dialed a number and, when he heard
the familiar voice on the other end of the line, said without preamble, "The progress
Bourne has been making is an ominous development. I can no longer afford to have Khan
kill Bourne in a public way—yes, I know, if he ever meant to kill Bourne. Khan's a
curious creature, a puzzle I've never been able to solve. But now that he's become
unpredictable, I've got to assume he's following his own agenda. If Bourne dies now,
Khan will fade into the woodwork and not even I will be able to find him. Nothing must
interfere with what will take place in two days' time. Do I make myself clear? Good.
Now, listen. There's only one way to neutralize them both."
McColl had received not only Annaka Vadas' name and address—by an extraordinary
stroke of luck, just four blocks north of the baths—but also her photo via a jpg file
downloaded to his cell phone. As a result, he had no trouble recognizing her when she
came out of the entrance to 106-108 Fo utca. He was immediately stirred by her beauty,

the authoritative manner of her gait. He watched as she put away her cell phone,
unlocked a blue Skoda and slid in behind the wheel.
Just before Annaka inserted her key into the ignition slot, Khan rose from the backseat
of the car and said, "I should tell Bourne everything."
She started but made no attempt to turn around; she was that well trained. Staring at
him in the rear-view mirror, she replied shortly, "Tell him what? You don't know
anything."
"I know enough. I know you're the one who brought the police to Mol-nar's apartment.
I know why you did that. Bourne was getting too close to the truth, wasn't he, getting too
close to finding out that Spalko was the one who'd set him up. I'd already told him, but it
seems he doesn't believe anything I say."
"Why should he? You have no credibility with him. He's convinced himself you're part
of a vast plot to manipulate him."
Khan whipped a steely hand over the seatback, gripping her arm, which had slowly
moved while she spoke. "Don't do that." He took her purse, opened it, removed the gun.
"You tried to kill me once. Believe me, you won't get a second chance."
She stared at his reflected image. Inside her was a constellation of emotions. "You
think I'm lying to you about Jason, but I'm not."
"What I'd like to know," he said easily, ignoring her comment, "was how you
convinced him you loved your father when, really, you hated his guts."
She sat mute, breathing slowly, trying to gather her wits. She knew she was in an
extremely perilous situation. The question was how was she going to extricate herself.
"How you must've rejoiced when he was shot to death," Khan continued, "though,
knowing you as I do, you probably wished you'd been able to shoot him yourself."
"If you're going to kill me," she said tersely, "do it now and spare me your useless
chatter."
With a move like a cobra, he leaned forward, grabbed her by her throat, and at last she
looked alarmed, which was, after all, the first thing he was after. "I don't intend to spare
you anything, Annaka. What did you spare me when you had the chance?"
"I didn't think I needed to baby you."
"You rarely thought when we were together," he said, "at least, not about me."
Her smile was cold. "Oh, I thought about you constantly."
"And repeated every one of those thoughts to Stepan Spalko." His hand tightened on
her throat, rattling her head from side to side. "Isn't that right?"
"Why ask me when you already know the answer?" she said a little breathlessly.
"How long has he been playing me?"
Annaka closed her eyes for a moment. "From the beginning."
Khan ground his teeth in fury. "What's his game? What does he want from me?"
"That I don't know." She made a wheezing noise as he squeezed so hard he cut off all
air to her windpipe. When he released his grip sufficiently, she said in a thin voice, "Hurt
me all you want, you'll still get the same answer, because it's the truth."

"The truth!" He laughed derisively. "You wouldn't know the truth if it bit you."
Nevertheless, he believed her, and was disgusted by her uselessness. "What's your
business with Bourne?" "Keeping him away from Stepan."
He nodded, recalling his conversation with Spalko. "That makes sense." The lie had
come easily to her lips. It had the ring of truth not only because she'd had a lifetime of
practice but because up until this last call from Spalko it had been the truth. Spalko's
plans had changed, and now that she'd had time to think it through, it suited her new
purpose to tell this to Khan. Perhaps it was fortuitous that he'd come upon her like this,
but only if she managed to get out of the encounter alive.
"Where's Spalko now?" he asked her. "Here in Budapest?" "Actually, he's on his way
back from Nairobi." Khan was surprised. "What was he doing in Nairobi?" She laughed,
but with his fingers painfully gripping her throat, it sounded more like a dry cough.
"D'you really think he'd tell me? You know how secretive he is."
He put his lips against her ear. "I know how secretive we used to be, Annaka—only it
wasn't secretive at all, was it?"
Her eyes engaged his in the mirror. "I didn't tell him everything." How strange it was
not to be looking at him directly. "Some things I kept for myself."
Khan's lips curled in contempt. "You don't actually expect me to believe that."
"Believe what you want," she said flatly, "you always have." He shook her again.
"Meaning?"
She gasped and bit her lower lip. "I never understood the depth of my hatred for my
father until I spent time with you." He let up on his grip and she swallowed convulsively.
"But you with your unswerving enmity toward your father, you showed me the light; you
showed me how to bide my time, to savor the thought of revenge. And you're right, when
he was shot, I felt the bitterness of not having done it myself."
Though he had no intention of showing it, what she said shook him. Up until a moment
ago, he'd had no idea he'd revealed so much of himself to her. He felt ashamed and
resentful that she'd been able to get so far under his skin without him being aware of it.
"We were together a year," he said, "a lifetime for people like us."
"Thirteen months, twenty-one days, six hours," she said. "I remember the precise
moment I walked out on you because it was then I knew I couldn't control you as Stepan
wanted me to."
"And why was that?" His voice was casual, even though his interest was anything but.
Her eyes had engaged his again, refused to let them go. "Because," she said, "when I
was with you, I could no longer control myself."
Was she telling the truth or was she playing him again? Khan, so certain about
everything until Jason Bourne had come back into his life, didn't know. Once again he
felt ashamed and resentful, even a bit frightened that his vaunted powers of observation
and instinct were failing him. Despite his best efforts, emotion had entered the picture,
spreading its toxic haze over his mind, clouding his judgment, becalming him on an
indistinct sea. He could feel his desire for her rising more strongly than it ever had before.
He wanted her so badly that he couldn't help but press his lips against the precious skin at
the nape of her neck.

And in so doing he missed the shadow's sudden fall into the interior of the Skoda, the
shadow marked by Annaka, who shifted her gaze, saw the burly American wrench open
the rear door and bring down the butt end of his gun onto the back of Khan's skull.
Khan's grip relaxed, his hand dropping away as he keeled over onto the backseat,
unconscious.
"Hello, Ms. Vadas," the burly American said in perfectly inflected Hungarian. He
smiled as he swept up her gun into his huge hand. "My name's McColl, but I'd be obliged
if you called me Kevin."
Zina dreamed of an orange sky, beneath which a modern-day horde—an army of
Chechens brandishing NX 20s—descended from the Caucuses onto the steppes of Russia
to lay waste to their bedeviling nemesis. But such was the power of Spalko's experiment
that for her it obliterated time. She was back again, a child in her parents' miserable shellshocked hovel, her mother staring at her from out of her ruined face, saying, "I can't get
up. Even for our water. I can't go on...."
But someone had to go on. She was then fifteen, the oldest of the four children. When
her mother's father-in-law came, he took only her brother Kanti, the male heir of the clan;
the Russians had either killed the others, including his own sons, or had sent them away
to the dreaded camps in Pobedinskoe and Krasnaya Turbina.
After that, she took over her mother's chores, collecting metal and water. But at night,
exhausted as she was, sleep escaped her, fleeing from the vision of Kanti's tear-streaked
face, his terror at leaving his family, everything he'd known.
Three times a week she slipped away crossing terrain littered with unex-ploded
landmines in order to see Kanti, to kiss his pale cheeks and give him news of home. One
day she arrived to find her grandfather dead. Of Kanti there was no sign. The Russian
Special Forces had come through in a sweep, killing her grandfather and taking her
brother to Krasnaya Turbina.
She'd spent the next six months trying to find news of Kanti, but she was young and
inexperienced in these matters. Besides, without money she could find no one willing to
talk. Three years later, her mother dead, her sisters in foster homes, she joined the rebel
forces. She hadn't chosen an easy path: She'd had to endure male intimidation; she'd had
to learn to be meek and subservient, to identify what she had then thought of as her
meager resources and husband them. But she had always been exceptionally clever and
this made her a quick learner of physical skills. It also provided her with a springboard
from which to discover how the power game was played. Unlike a man, who rose
through the ranks by intimidation, she was obliged to use the physical assets she was born
with. A year after enduring the hardships of one handler after another, she managed to
convince her controller to mount a night-time raid on Krasnaya Turbina.
This was the sole reason she had joined the rebels, had put herself through hell, but she
was frankly terrified of what she might find. And yet she found nothing, no evidence of
her brother's whereabouts. It was as if Kanti had simply ceased to exist.
Zina awoke with a gasp. She sat up, looked around, realized that she was in Spalko's
jet on the way to Iceland. In her mind's eye, still half in its dream-state, she saw Kanti's
tear-streaked face, smelled the acrid stench of lye coming from the killing pits at
Krasnaya Turbina. She put her head down. It was the uncertainty that ate at her. If she

knew he was dead, she could perhaps put her guilt to rest. But if, by some miracle of
chance, he was still alive, she would never know, couldn't come to his rescue, save him
from the terrors to which the Russians continued to subject him.
Aware of someone approaching, she looked up. It was Magomet, one of the two
lieutenants Hasan had brought with him to Nairobi to bear witness to the gateway to their
freedom. Akhmed, the other lieutenant, was studiously ignoring her as he had since he'd
seen her comfortable in Western dress. Magomet, a bear of a man with eyes the color of
Turkish coffee and a long curling beard he combed with his fingers when he was anxious,
stood slightly bent, leaning against the seatback.
"Is everything in order, Zina?" he asked.
Her eyes searched first for Hasan, found him asleep. Then she curved her lips in the
ghost of a smile. "I was dreaming of our coming triumph."
"It'll be magnificent, won't it? Vindication at last! Our day in the sun!"
She could tell that he was dying to sit next to her, so she said nothing; he would have
to be content with her not shooing him away. She stretched, arching her breasts, watching
with amusement as his eyes opened slightly. All that's missing is his tongue hanging out,
she thought.
"Would you like some coffee?" he said.
"I suppose I wouldn't mind." She kept her voice carefully neutral, knowing that he was
questing for hints. Her status, heightened by the important task the Shaykh had given her,
the trust implicit in what he'd asked of her, was clearly not lost on him, as it was on
Akhmed, who, like most Chechen males, saw her only as an inferior female. For a
moment, then, her nerve failed her as she considered the enormous cultural barrier she
was attempting to attack. But a moment's clear-eyed concentration returned her to her
normal state. The plan she'd formulated with the Shaykh's instigation was sound; it would
work—she knew it as surely as she drew breath. Now, as Magomet turned to go, she
spoke up in furtherance of that plan. "And while you're in the galley," she said, "bring
yourself a cup as well."
When he returned, she took the coffee from him, sipped it without inviting him to sit.
He stood, his elbows on the seatback, holding his cup between his hands.
"Tell me," Magomet said, "what's he like?"
"The Shaykh? Haven't you asked Hasan?"
"Hasan Arsenov says nothing."
"Perhaps," she said, looking at Magomet over the rim of her cup, "he jealously guards
his favored status."
"Do you?"
Zina laughed softly. "No. I don't mind sharing." She sipped more coffee. "The
Shaykh's a visionary. He sees the world not as it is but as it will be a year from now, five
years! It's quite astonishing to be around him, a man who's so in control of every aspect
of his self, a man who commands so much power across the globe."
Magomet made a sound of relief. "Then we're truly saved."
"Yes, saved." Zina put aside her cup, produced a straight razor and cream she'd found
in the well-equipped toilet. "Come sit down here, opposite me."

Magomet hesitated only an instant. When he sat, he was so close their knees touched.
"You can't deplane in Iceland looking like that, you know."
He watched her from out of his dark eyes as his fingers combed through his beard.
Without taking her eyes off his, Zina grasped his hand in hers, drew it away from his
beard. Then she opened the razor, applied cream to his right cheek. The blade scraped
against his flesh. Magomet trembled a little, then, as she began to shear him, his eyes
closed.
At some point she became aware that Akhmed was sitting up, watching her. By this
time, half of Magomet's face was clean-shaven. She continued what she was doing as
Akhmed rose and approached her. He said nothing but stared in disbelief as Magomet's
beard was peeled away and his face was slowly revealed.
At length he cleared his throat, said to her in a soft voice, "Do you think I could be
next?"
"I wouldn't have expected this guy to be carrying such a mediocre gun," Kevin McColl
said as he hauled Annaka out of the Skoda. He made a noise of contempt as he stowed it
away.
Annaka went meekly enough, happy that he'd mistaken her gun for Khan's. She stood
on the sidewalk beneath the sullen sky of afternoon, her head bowed, eyes lowered, a
secret smile lighting her up inside. Like many men, he couldn't fathom that she'd carry a
weapon, let alone might know how to use it. What he didn't know would certainly hurt
him—she'd make sure of it.
"First of all, I want to assure you that nothing will happen to you. All you have to do is
answer my questions truthfully and obey my commands to the letter." He used the pad of
his thumb on a minor nerve bundle on the inside of her elbow. Just enough to let her
know that he was deadly serious. "Do we understand each other?"
She nodded and cried out briefly as he bore down harder on the nerves.
"I expect you to answer when I ask you a question."
She said, "I understand, yes."
"Good." He took her into the shadows of the entrance to 106-108 Fo utca. "I'm looking
for Jason Bourne. Where is he?"
"I don't know."
Her knees buckled in pain as he did something terrible to the inside of her elbow.
"Shall we try it again?" he said. "Where's Jason Bourne?"
"Upstairs," she said as tears rolled down her cheeks. "In my apartment."
His grip on her loosened noticeably. "See how easy that was? No fuss, no muss. Now,
let's you and me go on up."
They went inside and she used her key. She turned on the light and they went up the
wide staircase. When they reached the fourth floor, McColl reined her in. "Hear me
now," he said softly. "As far as you're concerned, nothing's wrong. Got me?"
She almost nodded, caught herself and said, "Yes."

He pulled her back against him hard. "Give him any warning sign and I'll gut you like
a large-mouth bass." He shoved her forward. "Okay. Get on with it."
She walked to her door, put her key in the lock and opened it. She saw to her right that
Jason was slumped on the sofa, his eyes half closed.
Bourne looked up. "I thought you were—"
At that instant McColl shoved her, raised his gun. "Daddy's home!" he cried as he
aimed the gun at the recumbent figure and pulled the trigger.

CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO
Annaka, who'd been biding her time, waiting for McColl's first move, drove the point
of her cocked elbow into his arm, deflecting his aim. As a result, the bullet entered the
wall above Bourne's head where it met the ceiling.
McColl bellowed in rage, reached out with his left hand even as he was swinging his
right arm down to aim again at his recumbent target. His fingers sank into Annaka's hair,
grabbed tight, jerked her back off her feet. At that moment Bourne brought his ceramic
gun from beneath the eiderdown. He wanted to shoot the intruder in the chest, but
Annaka was in the way. Altering his aim, he shot the intruder through the meat of his gun
arm. The gun fell to the carpet, blood splattered from the wound, and Annaka screamed
as the intruder dragged her back against his chest as a shield.
Bourne was up on one knee, the muzzle of his gun roaming, as the intruder, with
Annaka braced against him, backed toward the open door.
"This isn't over, not by a long shot," he said, his gaze on Bourne. "I've never lost a
sanction and I don't intend to start now." With that ominous pronouncement, he picked
Annaka up and hurled her at Bourne.
Bourne, off the sofa, caught Annaka before she had a chance to smash into the side of
it. He whirled her around, then sprinted through the open doorway in time to see the
elevator door closing. He took the stairs, limping a little. His side felt as if it were on fire
and his legs were weak. His breathing became labored and he wanted to stop, if only to
be able to get enough oxygen in his lungs, but he kept going, taking the stairs two and
three at a time. Rounding the first-floor landing, his left foot slipped on the edge of a
tread and he went down, half-falling, half-sliding down the rest of the flight. He groaned
as he rose, slammed through the door into the lobby. There was blood on the marble floor
but no assassin. He took a step into the lobby, and his legs collapsed out from under him.
He sat there, half-stunned, his gun in one hand, the other lying palm up on his thigh. His
eyes were glazed with pain and it seemed to him as if he'd forgotten how to breathe.
I've got to go after the bastard, he thought. But there was a tremendous noise in his
head that he eventually identified as the thudding of his heart working overtime. For the
moment, at least, he was incapable of movement. He had just enough time, before
Annaka arrived, to reflect that his staged death hadn't fooled the Agency for long.
When she saw him, her face turned white with concern. "Jason!" She knelt beside him,
her arm around him.

"Help me up," he said.
She took his weight with her canted hip. "Where is he? Where did he go?"
He should've been able to answer her. Christ, he thought, maybe she was right, maybe
he really did need to see a doctor.
Perhaps it was the venom in his heart that had pulled Khan back from unconsciousness
so quickly. In any case, he was up and out of the Skoda within minutes of the attack. His
head hurt, to be sure, but it was his ego that had taken the brunt of the attack. He replayed
the whole sorry scene in his mind, knew with a certainty that caused a sinking feeling in
his stomach that it was only his foolish and dangerous feelings for Annaka that had made
him vulnerable.
What more proof did he need that emotional attachment was to be shunned at all costs?
It had cost him dearly with his parents and, again, with Richard Wick, and now most
recently with Annaka, who from the first had betrayed him to Stepan Spalko.
And what of Spalko? "We're far from strangers. We share secrets of the most intimate
nature," he'd said that night in Grozny. "I'd like to think we're more than businessman
and client."
Like Richard Wick, he'd offered to take Khan in, claimed he wanted to be his friend, to
make him part of a hidden—and somehow intimate— world. "You owe your impeccable
reputation in no small part to the commissions I've given you." As if Spalko, like Wick,
believed he was Khan's benefactor. These people were under the misapprehension that
they lived on a higher plane, that they belonged to the elite. Like Wick, Spalko had lied to
Khan so that he could use him for his own purposes.
What had Spalko wanted from him? It almost didn't matter; he was past caring. All he
wanted was his pound of flesh from Stepan Spalko, a reckoning that would set past
injustices to rights. Nothing less than Spalko's death would assuage him now. Spalko
would be his first and last commission from himself.
It was then, crouched in the shadows of a doorway, unconsciously massaging the back
of his head where a lump had already been raised, that he heard her voice. It rose from
the deep, from the shadows in which he sat, dropping down through the depths, pulled
under the purling waves.
"Lee-Lee," he whispered. "Lee-Lee!"
It was her voice he heard calling to him. He knew what she wanted; she wanted him to
join her in the drowned depths. He put his aching head in his hands and a terrible sob
escaped his lips like the last bubble of air from his lungs. Lee-Lee. He hadn't thought of
her in so long—or had he? He'd dreamed about her almost every night; it had taken him
this long to realize it. Why? What was different now that she should come to him so
strongly after such a long time gone?
It was then he heard the slam of the front door and his head came up in time for him to
see the big man racing out of the entrance to 106-108 Fo utca. He was grasping one hand
with the other, and by the trail of blood behind him Khan figured that he'd run into Jason
Bourne. A small smile crept across his face, for he knew this must be the man who'd
attacked him.

Khan felt an immediate urge to kill him, but with an effort he gained control and came
up with a better idea. Leaving the shadows, he followed the figure as he fled down Fo
utca.
Dohdny Synagogue was the largest synagogue in Europe. On its western side, the
massive structure had an intricate Byzantine brickwork facade in blue, red and yellow,
the heraldic colors of Budapest. Crowning the entrance was a large stained-glass window.
Above this impressive sight rose two Moorish polygonal towers topped by striking
copper and gilt cupolas. "I'll go in and get him," Annaka said as they got out of her Skoda.
Istvan's service had tried to direct her to a covering doctor, but she'd insisted that she
needed to see Dr. Ambrus, that she was an old family friend, and at length they'd directed
her here. "The fewer people who see you like this, the better."
Bourne agreed. "Listen, Annaka, I'm beginning to lose count of the times you've saved
my life."
She looked at him and smiled. "Then stop counting."
"The man who assaulted you."
"Kevin McColl."
"He's an Agency specialist." There was no need for Bourne to have to tell her what sort
of specialist McColl was. Yet another thing he liked about her. "You handled him well."
"Until he used me as a shield," she said bitterly. "I should never have allowed—"
"We got out of it. That's all that matters."
"But he's still at large, and his threat—"
"The next time I'll be ready for him."
The small smile returned to her face. She directed him to the courtyard in the rear of
the synagogue, where she told him he could wait for them without fear of running into
anyone.
Istvan Ambrus, the doctor of Janos Vadas' acquaintance, was inside at service, but he
was amenable enough when Annaka went in and told him of the emergency.
"Of course, I'm pleased to help you in any way I can, Annaka," he said as he rose from
his seat and walked with her through the magnificent chande-liered interior. Behind them
was the great five-thousand-tube organ, highly unusual in a Jewish house of worship, on
whose keyboard the great composers Franz Liszt and Camille Saint-Saens had once
played.
"Your father's death has hit us all very hard." He took her hand, squeezed it briefly. He
had the blunt, strong fingers of a surgeon or a bricklayer. "How are you holding up, my
dear?"
"As well as can be expected," she said softly, leading him outside.
Bourne was sitting in the courtyard under whose earth lay the corpses of five thousand
Jews who had perished in the brutal winter of 1944-45, when Adolph Eichmann turned
the synagogue into a concentration point from which he sent ten times that number to
camps where they were exterminated. The courtyard, contained between the arches of the

inner loggia, was filled with pale memorial stones through which dark-green ivy crept.
The trunks of the trees with which it had been planted were similarly wound with the
vines. A cold wind ruffled the leaves, a sound that in this place could have been mistaken
for distant voices.
It was difficult to sit here and not think of the dead and of the terrible suffering that had
gone on here during that dark time. He wondered whether another dark time was
gathering itself to overwhelm them once again. He looked up from his contemplation to
see Annaka in the company of a round-faced, dapper individual with a pencil mustache
and apple cheeks. He was dressed in a brown three-piece suit. The shoes on his small feet
were highly polished.
"So you're the disaster in question," he said after Annaka had made the introductions,
assuring him that Bourne could speak their native tongue. "No, don't get up," he went on
as he sat down beside Bourne and began his examination. "Well, sir, I don't believe
Annaka's description did your injuries justice. You look like you've been put through a
wurst-grinder."
"That's just how I feel, Doctor." Bourne winced despite himself as Dr. Ambrus' fingers
probed a particularly painful spot.
"As I walked out into the courtyard, I saw you deep in thought," Dr. Ambrus said in a
conversational tone. "In a sense, this is a terrible place, this courtyard, reminding us of
those we've lost and, in a larger sense, what humanity as a whole lost during the
Holocaust." His fingers were surprisingly light as well as agile as they roamed over the
tender flesh of Bourne's side. "But the history of that time isn't all so grim, you know.
Just before Eichmann and his staff marched in, several priests helped the rabbi remove
the twenty-seven scrolls of the Torah from the Ark inside the synagogue. They took them,
these priests, and buried them in a Christian cemetery, where they remained safe from the
Nazis until after the war was ended." He smiled thinly. "So what does this tell us? There
remains the potential for light even in the darkest places. Compassion can come from the
most unexpected places. And you have two cracked ribs."
He rose now. "Come. I have at my house all the equipment necessary to bind you up.
In a matter of just a week or so the pain will recede, and you'll be on the mend." He
waggled a thick forefinger. "But in the interim you must promise me you'll rest. No
strenuous exercise for you. In fact, no exercise at all would be best."
"I can't promise you that, Doctor."
Dr. Ambrus sighed as he shot Annaka a quick glance. "Now why doesn't that surprise
me?"
Bourne got to his feet. "In fact, I'm very much afraid I'm going to have to do
everything you've just warned me against, in which case I've got to ask you to do what
you can in order to protect the damaged ribs."
"How about a suit of armor?" Dr. Ambrus chuckled at his own joke, but his
amusement quickly dropped away as he saw the expression on Bourne's face. "Good God,
man, what do you expect to be going up against?"
"If I could tell you," Bourne said bleakly, "I imagine we'd all be better off."

Though clearly taken aback, Dr. Ambrus was as good as his word, leading them to his
house in the Buda Hills where he had a small examining room where others might have
had a study. Outside the window were climbing roses, but the geranium pots were still
bare, awaiting warmer weather. Inside, were cream walls, white moldings, and on top of
the cabinets, framed snapshots of Dr. Ambrus' wife and his two sons.
Dr. Ambrus sat Bourne down on the table, humming to himself as he went
methodically through his cabinets, picking out one item here, two more there. Returning
to his patient who he'd bade strip to the waist, he swung an armatured light around,
snapped it on the field of battle. Then he went to work binding Bourne's ribs tightly in
three different layers of material—cotton, spandex and a rubberlike material he said
contained Kevlar.
"Better than that no one could do," he declared when he was finished.
"I can't breathe," Bourne gasped.
"Good, that means the pain will be kept to a minimum." He rattled a small brown
plastic bottle. "I'd give you some painkillers, but for a man such as yourself—urn, no, I
think not. The drug will interfere with your senses, your reflexes will be off, and the next
time I see you, you might be on a slab."
Bourne smiled at the attempt at humor. "I'll do my best to spare you that shock."
Bourne dug in a pocket. "How much do I owe you?"
Dr. Ambrus raised his hands. "Please."
"How to thank you, then, Istvan?" Annaka said.
"Just to see you again, my dear, is payment enough." Dr. Ambrus took her face in his
hands, kissed her on first one cheek, then the other. "Promise me you'll come to dinner
one night soon. Bela misses you as much as I. Come, my dear. Come. She'll make you
her goulash, which you loved as a child."
"I promise, Istvan. Soon."
Content at last with this promise of payment, Dr. Ambrus let them go.

CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE
"Something needs to be done about Randy Driver," Lindros said.
The DCI finished signing a set of papers, pushing them into his outbox before looking
up. "I heard he gave you a sound tongue-lashing."
"I don't understand. Is this a source of amusement for you, sir?"
"Indulge me, Martin," he said with a smirk he refused to hide. "I have few sources of
entertainment these days."
The sun-dazzle that had all afternoon spun off the statue of the three Revolutionary
War soldiers outside the window was gone, making the bronze figures appear weary in
the shadows shrouding them. The fragile light of another spring day had all too quickly
passed into night.
"I want him taken care of. I want access—"

The DCI's face darkened." 'I want, I want'—what are you, a three-year-old?"
"You put me in charge of the investigation into Conklin's and Panov's murders. I'm
only doing what you asked."
"Investigation?" The DCI's eyes sparked with anger. "There is no investigation. I told
you in no uncertain terms, Martin, that I wanted an end to this. The bleeding is killing us
with the bitch-woman. I want it cauterized so it can be forgotten. The last thing I need is
for you to be running all over the Beltway, throwing your weight around like a bull in a
china shop." He waved a hand to stave off his deputy's protestations. "Hang Harris, hang
him high and loud enough for the National Security Advisor to be certain we know what
we're doing."
"If you say so, sir, but with all due respect that would be just about the worst mistake
we could make right now." As the DCI stared open-mouth at him, he spun across the
desk the computer printout Harris had sent over.
"What is this?" the DCI said. He liked a precis of everything he was given before he
had a chance to read it.
"It's part of the electronic record of a ring of Russians providing people with illegal
handguns. The gun used to murder Conldin and Panov is there. It was falsely registered
to Webb. This proves Webb was set up, that he didn't murder his two best friends."
The DCI had begun reading the printout, and now his thick white brows furrowed.
"Martin, this proves nothing."
"Again, with all due respect, sir, I don't see how you can ignore the facts that are right
in front of you."
The DCI sighed, pushed the printout away from him as he sat back in his chair. "You
know, Martin, I've trained you well. But it occurs to me now that you still have a great
deal to learn." He pointed a forefinger at the paper lying on his desk. "This tells me that
the gun Jason Bourne used to shoot Alex and Mo Panov was paid for via a wire transfer
from Budapest. Bourne has I don't know how many bank accounts overseas, in Zurich
and Geneva mostly, but I don't see why he wouldn't have one in Budapest as well." He
grunted. "It's a clever trick, one of so many taught to him by Alex himself."
Lindros' heart had plummeted to his shoes. "So you don't think—"
"You want me to take this so-called evidence to the bitch-woman?" The DCI shook his
head. "She'd shove it back down my throat."
Of course, the first thing that had entered the Old Man's mind was that Bourne had
hacked into the U.S. Government database from Budapest, which was why he himself
had activated Kevin McColl. No point telling Martin that; he'd only get himself all het up.
No, the DCI thought obstinately, the money for the murder weapon had originated in
Budapest and that was where Bourne had fled. Further damning evidence of his guilt.
Lindros broke in on his musing. "So you won't authorize going back to Driver—"
"Martin, it's coming up on seven-thirty and my stomach has started to rumble." The
DCI stood. "To show you that there's no hard feelings, I want you to join me for dinner."
The Occidental Grill was an insider restaurant at which the DCI had his own table. It
was for civilians and low-grade government employees to stand on lines, not for him. In

this arena his power rose out of the shadow world he inhabited, made itself known to all
of Washington. There were precious few inside the Beltway who possessed this status.
After a difficult day, there was nothing like using it.
They valet-parked and mounted the long flight of granite steps to the restaurant. Inside,
they went down a narrow passageway hung with photos of the presidents as well as other
famous political personages who had dined at the grill. As he always did, the DCI paused
in front of the photo of J. Edgar Hoover and his ever-constant shadow, Clyde Tolson. The
DCI's eyes bored into the photo of the two men as if he had the power to expunge by fire
this duo from the pantheon on the wall of greats.
"I distinctly remember the moment we intercepted the Hoover memo exhorting his
senior officers to find the link that tied Martin Luther King, Jr., and the Communist Party
to the anti-Vietnam War demonstrations." He shook his head. "What a world I've been a
party to."
"It's history, sir."
"Ignominious history, Martin."
With that pronouncement, he passed through the half-glass doors into the restaurant
itself. The room was all wooden booths, cut-glass partitions and mirrored bar. As usual,
there was a line, which the DCI navigated like the Queen Mary sailing through a flotilla
of motorboats. He stopped in front of the podium, which was presided over by an elegant
silver-haired maitre d'.
At the DCI's approach, the man turned with a brace of long menus clutched to his
breast. "Director!" His eyes opened wide. There was an odd paleness to his usually florid
skin. "We had no idea that you'd be dining with us tonight."
"Since when do you need advance notice, Jack?" The DCI said.
"May I suggest a drink at the bar, Director? I have your favorite sour mash."
The DCI patted his stomach. "I'm hungry, Jack. We'll dispense with the bar and go
straight to my table."
The maitre d' looked distinctly uncomfortable. "Please give me a moment, Director,"
he said, hurrying away.
"What the hell's the matter with him?" muttered the DCI with some annoyance.
Lindros had already taken a look at the DCI's corner table, saw that it was occupied,
and blanched. The DCI saw his expression and he whirled, peering through the throng of
waiters and patrons at his beloved table, where the power seat reserved for him was now
occupied by Roberta Alonzo-Ortiz, National Security Advisor of the United States. She
was deep in conversation with two senators from the Foreign Intelligence Services
Committee.
"I'll kill her, Martin. So help me God, I'll rend the bitch-woman limb from limb."
At that moment the maitre d', clearly sweating inside his collar, returned. "We have a
nice table all set up for you, Director, a table for four, just for you gentlemen. And the
drinks're on the house, all right?"
The DCI bit back his rage. "It's quite all right," he said, aware that he was unable to rid
himself of his high color. "Lead on, Jack."

The maitre d' took them on a route that didn't pass his old table, and the DCI was
grateful to Jack for that.
"I told her, Director," the maitre d' said almost under his breath. "I made it quite clear
that that particular corner table was yours, but she insisted. She wouldn't take no for an
answer. What could I do? I'll have the drinks over in just a minute." Jack said all this in a
rush as he seated them, presenting the food and wine menus. "Is there anything else I can
do, Director?" "No, thank you, Jack." The DCI picked up his menu. A moment later a
burly waiter with muttonchop sideburns brought two glasses of sour mash, along with the
bottle and a carafe of water. "Compliments of the maitre d'," he said.
If Lindros had been under any illusion that the DCI was calm, he was disabused of that
notion the moment the Old Man took up his glass to sip his sour mash. His hand shook,
and now Lindros could see that his eyes were glazed with rage.
Lindros saw his opening and, like the fine tactician he was, took it. "The National
Security Advisor wants the double murders attended to and swept away with as little fuss
as possible. But if the basic assumption that underlies this reasoning—mainly that Jason
Bourne is responsible—is untrue, then everything else falls apart, including the NSA's
extremely vocal position."
The DCI looked up. He stared shrewdly at his deputy. "I know you, Martin. You
already have some plan in mind, don't you?"
"Yessir, I do, and if I'm right, we'll make the NSA look like fools. But for that to
happen, I need Randy Driver's full and complete cooperation." The waiter appeared with
the chopped salads. The DCI waited until they were alone and poured them both more
sour mash. With a tight smile, he said, "This business with Randy Driver—you believe
it's necessary?"
"More than necessary, sir. It's vital."
"Vital, eh?" The DCI tucked into his salad, looked at the resulting piece of glistening
tomato impaled on the tines of his fork. "I'll sign the paperwork first thing tomorrow."
"Thank you, sir."
The DCI frowned, his gaze sought out that of his deputy, held it captive. "Only one
way to thank me, Martin, bring me the ammunition I need to put the bitch-woman in her
place."
The advantage of having a girl in every port, McColl knew, was that he always had a
place to hole up. There was, of course, an Agency safe house in Budapest—in fact, there
were several, but with his bleeding arm he had no intention of showing up in an official
residence and thereby announcing to his superiors his failure to satisfy the sanction the
DCI himself had given him. In his section of the Agency, results were the only thing that
mattered.
Ilona was home when, wounded arm at his side, he stumbled up to her door. As always,
she was ready for action. He, for once, wasn't, he had business to attend to first. He sent
her to make him something to eat—something proteinaceous, he told her, for he needed
to regain his strength. Then he went into her bathroom, stripped to the waist, and washed
off the blood from his right arm. Then he poured hydrogen peroxide over the wound. The
searing pain shot up and down his arm and made his legs tremble so that he was obliged

to sit for a moment on the closed toilet lid in order to collect himself. In a moment the
pain had subsided to a deep throbbing and he was able to assess the damage done him.
The good news was that the wound was clean; the bullet had gone cleanly through the
muscle of his arm and exited. Leaning over so that he could rest his elbow on the edge of
the sink, he poured more hydrogen peroxide on the wound, whistled softly through his
bared teeth. Then he rose, rifled through the cabinets without finding any sterile cotton
pads. He did find, under the sink, a roll of duct tape. Using a pair of cuticle scissors, he
cut off a length, wrapped it tightly around the wound.
When he returned, Ilona had his meal prepared. He sat, wolfing down the food without
tasting it. It was hot and nourishing, which was all he cared about. She stood behind him
as he ate, massaging the bunched muscles of his shoulders.
"You're so tense," she said. She was small and slender with flashing eyes, a ready
smile, and curves in all the right places. "What did you do after you left me at the baths?
You were so relaxed then."
"Work," he said laconically. He knew by experience that it wasn't politic to ignore her
questions, though he had very little desire for small talk. He needed to gather his thoughts,
plan for the second, and final, assault on Jason Bourne. "I've told you my work is
stressful."
Her talented fingers continued to kneed the tension out of him. "I wish you'd quit
then."
"I love what I do," he said, pushing his empty plate away. "I'd never quit."
"And still you're sullen." She came around, held out her hand. "Then come to bed now.
Let me make it better."
"You go," he said. "Wait for me there. I've some business calls to make. When I'm
finished, I'll be all yours."
Morning came in a bevy of shouts to the small, anonymous room in a cheap hotel. The
sounds of Budapest stirring penetrated the thin walls as if they were gauze, goading
Annaka from her fitful sleep. For a time she lay immobile in the grayish morning
illumination, side by side with Bourne on the double bed. At length she turned her head,
stared at him.
How her life had changed since she'd met him on the steps of Matthias Church! Her
father was dead and now she couldn't return to her own apartment because its location
was known to both Khan and the CIA. In truth, there wasn't much about her apartment
she'd miss, except for her piano. The pang of yearning she felt for it was akin to what
she'd read identical twins experienced when they were separated by a great distance.
And what of Bourne, what did she feel for him? It was difficult for her to tell, since
from an early age a certain switch had been thrown inside her that had turned off the
spigot of emotion. The mechanism, a form of self-preservation instinct, was a complete
mystery, even to experts who purported to study such phenomena. It was buried so
deeply inside her mind that she could never reach it—another aspect of its preservation of
the self.
As in everything else, she'd lied to Khan when she'd told him that she couldn't control
herself around him. She'd walked out on him because Stepan had ordered her to leave.

She hadn't minded; in fact, she'd rather relished the look on Khan's face when she'd told
him it was over. She'd hurt him, which she liked. At the same time she saw that he'd
cared for her, and she was curious about this, not understanding it herself. Of course, long
ago and far away she'd cared about her mother, but of what use had that emotion been?
Her mother had failed to protect her; worse, she'd died.
Slowly, carefully, she inched away from Bourne until finally she turned and rose. She
was reaching for her coat when Bourne, rising from deep sleep to immediate wakefulness,
spoke her name softly.
Annaka started, turned. "I thought you were fast asleep. Did I wake you?"
Bourne watched her, unblinking. "Where are you going?"
"I... we need new clothes."
He struggled to sit up.
"How are you feeling?"
"I'm fine," he said. He was in no mood for receiving sympathy. "Besides clothes, we
both need disguises."
"We?"
"McColl knew who you were, that means he'd been sent a photo of you."
"But why?" She shook her head. "How did the CIA know you and I were together?"
"They didn't—at least, they couldn't be sure," he said. "I've been thinking, and the only
way they could've made you was through your computer's IP address. I must've set off an
internal alarm when I hacked into the government's intranet."
"God in heaven." She slipped into her coat. "Still, it's far safer for me out on the streets
than it would be for you."
"Do you know a shop that sells theatrical makeup?"
"There's a district not far from here. Yes, I'm sure I can find a place."
Bourne grabbed a pad and the stub of a pencil off the desk and made a hurried list.
"This is what I'll need for both of us," he said. "I've also written down my shirt, neck and
waist sizes. Do you have enough money? I have plenty but it's in American dollars."
She shook her head. "Too dangerous. I'd have to go to a bank and change it into
Hungarian forint, and that might be noticed. There are ATM's all over the city."
"Be careful," he warned.
"Don't worry." She glanced at the list he'd made. "I should be back in a couple of hours.
Until then, don't leave the room."
She descended in the tiny creaking elevator. Save for the day clerk behind the desk, the
commensurately tiny lobby was deserted. He lifted his head from his newspaper, glanced
at her with bored eyes before returning to his reading. She went out into bustling
Budapest. The presence of Kevin McColl, a complicating factor, made her uneasy, but
Stepan reassured her when she telephoned him with the news. She'd been updating him
when she'd telephoned him from her apartment every time she'd run the water in the
kitchen.
As she entered the flow of pedestrian traffic, she glanced at her watch. It was just after
ten. She had coffee and a sweet roll at a corner cafe, then proceeded on to an ATM about

two-thirds of the way to the shopping district toward which she was headed. She slipped
in her debit card, withdrew the maximum amount, put the wad of bills in her purse and,
with Bourne's list in hand, set out to shop.
Across town, Kevin McColl strode into the branch of the Budapest Bank that handled
Annaka Vadas' account. He flashed his credentials and, in due course, was admitted to
the glass-enclosed office of the branch manager, a well-dressed man in a conservatively
cut suit. They shook hands as they introduced themselves and the manager indicated that
McColl sit in the upholstered chair facing him.
The manager steepled his fingers and said, "How can I be of assistance, Mr. McColl?"
"We're looking for an international fugitive," McColl began.
"Ah, and why isn't Interpol involved?"
"They are," McColl said, "as well as the Quai d'Orsay in Paris, which was this
fugitive's last stop before coming here to Budapest."
"And the name of this wanted man?"
McColl produced the CIA flyer, which he unfolded and set on the desk in front of the
manager.
The bank manager adjusted his glasses as he scanned the flyer. "Ah, yes, Jason Bourne.
I watch CNN." He glanced up over the gold rim of his glasses. "You say he's here in
Budapest."
"We've got a confirmed sighting."
The bank manager set the flyer aside. "And how may I help?"
"He was in the company of one of your depositors. Annaka Vadas."
"Really?" The bank manager frowned. "Her father was killed—shot dead two days ago.
Do you think the fugitive murdered him?"
"It's entirely possible." McColl held tight rein on his impatience. "I would appreciate
your help in finding out if Ms. Vadas has used an ATM anytime in the last twenty-four
hours."
"I understand." The bank manager nodded sagely. "The fugitive needs money. He
might force her to get it for him."
"Precisely." Anything, McColl thought, to get this guy to move off the dime.
The bank manager swiveled around, began to type on his computer keyboard. "Let's
see then. Ah, yes, here she is. Annaka Vadas." He shook his head. "Such a tragedy. And
now to be subjected to this."
He was staring at his computer screen when a chirp sounded. "It seems you were right,
Mr. McColl. Annaka Vadas' PIN number was used at an ATM less than a half hour ago."
"Address," McColl said, leaning forward.
The manager wrote the address down on a sheet of notepaper, handed it to McColl,
who was up and on his way with a "Thank you" thrown over his shoulder.
Bourne, down in the lobby of the hotel, asked the clerk for directions to the nearest
public Internet access point. He walked the twelve blocks to AMI Internet Cafe at 40

Vaci utca. Inside, it was smoky and crowded, people sit-, ting at computer stations,
smoking as they read e-mail, did research or simply surfed the Web. He ordered a
double-espresso and a buttered roll from a spike-haired young woman, who handed him a
time-stamped slip of paper with the number of his station on it and directed him to a free
computer that was already logged onto the Internet.
He sat down and began his work. In the "Search" field, he typed in the name of Peter
Sido, Dr. Schiffer's former partner, but found nothing. That, in itself, was both odd and
suspicious. If Sido was a scientist of any note at all—which Bourne had to assume he was
if he'd worked with Felix Schiffer—then chances were he'd be somewhere on the Web.
The fact that he wasn't caused Bourne to consider the fact that his "absence" was
deliberate. He'd have to try another path.
There was something about the name Sido that rang a bell in his linguist's brain. Was it
Russian in origin? Slavic? He searched these language sites but came up blank. On a
hunch he switched to a site on the Magyar language, and there it was.
It turned out that Hungarian family names—what Hungarians called bynames—most
always meant something. For instance, they could be patronymic, meaning they used the
father's name, or they could be locative, identifying where the person came from. Their
family name could also tell you their profession—interestingly, he noted that Vadas
meant hunter. Or what they were. Sido was the Hungarian word for Jew.
So Peter Sido was a Hungarian, just like Vadas. Conklin had chosen Vadas to work
with. Coincidence? Bourne didn't believe in coincidences. There was a connection; he
could sense it. Which opened up the following line of thought: All the world-class
hospitals and research facilities in Hungary were in Budapest. Could Sido be here?
Bourne's hands flew over the keyboard, accessing the on-line Budapest phone
directory. And there he found a Dr. Peter Sido. He noted the address and phone number,
then logged off, paid for his time on-line and took his double espresso and roll to the cafe
section, where he sat at a corner table away from other patrons. He chomped on his roll
while he took out his cell phone and dialed Side's number. He sipped his double espresso.
After several rings, a female voice answered.
"Hello," Bourne said in a cheerful voice, "Mrs. Sido?"
"Yes?"
He hung up without responding, wolfed down the rest of his breakfast while waiting
for the taxi he'd called for. One eye on the front door, he scrutinized everyone who
walked in, on the lookout for McColl or any other Agency operative who might have
been sent into the field. Certain that he was unobserved, he went out into the street to
meet the taxi. He gave the driver Dr. Peter Sido's address and not more than twenty
minutes later, the taxi drew up in front of a small house with a stone facade, a tiny garden
in front, and miniature iron balconies projecting from each story.
He climbed the steps and knocked. The front door was opened by a rather rotund
woman of middle years with soft brown eyes and a ready smile. She had brown hair,
pulled back in a bun, and was stylishly dressed.
"Mrs. Sido? Dr. Peter Sido's wife?"
"That's right." She gazed at him inquiringly. "May I help you?"
"My name is David Schiffer."

"Yes?"
He smiled winningly. "Felix Schiffer's cousin, Mrs. Sido."
"I'm sorry," Peter Sido's wife said, "but Felix never mentioned you."
Bourne was prepared for this. He chuckled. "That's not surprising. You see, we lost
touch with each other. I'm only now just returned from Australia."
"Australia! My word!" She stepped aside. "Well, do come in, please. You must think
me rude."
"Not at all," Bourne said. "Simply surprised, as anyone would be."
She showed him into a small sitting room, comfortably, if darkly, furnished and bade
him make himself at home. The air smelled of yeast and sugar. When he was seated in an
over-upholstered chair, she said, "Would you like coffee or tea? I have some stollen. I
baked it this morning."
"Stollen, a favorite of mine," he said. "And only coffee will do with stollen. Thank
you."
She chuckled and headed for the kitchen. "Are you sure you're not part Hungarian, Mr.
Schiffer?"
"Please call me David," he said, rising and following her. Not knowing the family
background, he was on shaky ground when it came to the Schif-fers. "Is there something
I can help you with?"
"Why, thank you, David. And you must call me Eszti." She pointed at a covered cake
platter. "Why don't you cut us each a piece?"
On the refrigerator door, he saw among several family snapshots, one of a young
woman, very pretty, alone. Her hand was pressed to the top of her Scottish tarn and her
long dark hair was windblown. Behind her was the Tower of London.
"Your daughter?" Bourne said.
Eszti Sido glanced up and smiled. "Yes, Roza, my youngest. She's at school in London.
Cambridge," she said with understandable pride. "My other daughters—there they are
with their families—are both happily married, thank God. Roza's the ambitious one." She
smiled shyly. "Shall I tell you a secret, David? I love all my children, but Roza is my
favorite—Peter's too. I think he sees something of himself in her. She loves the sciences."
Several more minutes of bustling around the kitchen brought a carafe of coffee and
plates of stollen on a tray, which Bourne carried back into the sitting room.
"So you're Felix's cousin," she said when they were both settled, he on the chair, she on
the sofa. Between them was a low table on which Bourne had placed the tray.
"Yes, and I'm eager for news of Felix," Bourne said as she poured the coffee. "But, you
see, I can't find him, and I thought... well, I was hoping your husband could help me out."
"I don't think he knows where Felix is." Eszti Sido handed him the coffee and a plate
of stollen. "I don't mean to alarm you, David, but he's been quite upset lately. Though
they hadn't officially worked together for some time, they'd had a long-distance
correspondence going recently." She stirred cream into her coffee. "They never stopped
being good friends, you see." "So this recent correspondence was of a personal nature,"
Bourne said. "I don't know about that." Eszti frowned. "I gathered that it had something
to do with their work."

"You wouldn't know what, would you, Eszti? I've come a long way to find my cousin,
and, frankly, I've begun to worry a little. Anything you or your husband could tell me,
anything at all would be of great help."
"Of course, David, I understand completely." She took a dainty bite of her stollen. "I
imagine Peter would be quite happy to see you. At the moment, though, he's at work."
"D'you think I could have his phone number?"
"Oh, that won't do you any good. Peter never answers his phone at work. You'll have
to go to the Eurocenter Bio-I Clinic at 75 Hattyu utca. When you do, you'll first go
through a metal detector, after which you'll be stopped at the front desk. Because of the
work they do there, they're exceptionally security conscious. They require special ID tags
to get into his section, white for visitors, green for resident doctors, blue for assistants and
support staff."
"Thank you for the information, Eszti. May I inquire as to what your husband
specializes in?"
"You mean Felix never told you?"
Bourne, sipping his delicious coffee, swallowed. "As I'm sure you know, Felix is a
secretive person, he never spoke to me about his work."
"Quite so." Eszti Sido laughed. "Peter's just the same and, considering the frightening
field he's in, it's just as well. I'm sure if I knew what he was into, I'd have nightmares.
You see, he's an epidemiologist."
Bourne's heart skipped a beat. "Frightening, you say. He must work with some nasty
bugs then. Anthrax, pneumonic plague, Argentinian hemor-rhagic fever ..."
Eszti Side's face clouded over. "Oh dear, oh dear, please!" She waved a pudgy-fingered
hand. "Those are just the things I know Peter works with but don't want to know about."
"I apologize." Bourne leaned forward, poured her more coffee, for which she thanked
him in relief.
She sat back, sipping her coffee, her eyes turned inward. "You know, David, now that I
think about it, there was an evening not long ago when Peter came home in a high state of
excitement. So much so, in fact, that for once he forgot himself and mentioned something
to me. I was cooking dinner and he was unusually late and I was having to juggle six
things at once—a roast, you know, doesn't like to be overcooked, so I'd taken it out, then
put it back when Peter finally walked through the door. I wasn't happy with him that
night, I can tell you." She sipped again. "Now, where was I?"
"Dr. Sido came home very excited," Bourne prompted.
"Ah, yes, just so." She took up a tiny piece of the stollen between her fingers. "He'd
been in contact with Felix, he said, who'd had some sort of breakthrough with the—
thing—he'd been working on for more than two years."
Bourne's mouth was dry. It seemed odd to him that the fate of the world now lay with a
housewife with whom he was cozily sharing coffee and homemade pastry. "Did your
husband tell you what it was?"
"Of course he did!" Eszti Sido said with gusto. "That was the reason he was so
exercised. It was a biochemical disperser—whatever that is. According to Peter, what
was so extraordinary about it was that it was portable. It could be carried in an acoustic

guitar case, he said." Her kind eyes gazed at him. "Isn't that an interesting image to use
for a scientific mingy?"
"Interesting, indeed," Bourne said, his mind furiously clicking into place pieces of the
jigsaw puzzle the pursuit of which had more than once almost gotten him killed.
He rose. "Eszti, I'm afraid I must be going. Thank you so much for your time and your
hospitality. Everything was delicious—especially the stollen."
She blushed, smiling warmly as she saw him to the door. "Do come again, David,
under happier circumstances."
"I will," he assured her.
Out on the street, he paused. Eszti Sido's information confirmed both his suspicions
and his worst fears. The reason everyone wanted to get their hands on Dr. Schiffer was
that he had indeed created a portable means of dispersing chemical and biological
pathogens. In a big city such as New York or Moscow, that would mean thousands of
deaths with no means to save anyone within the radius of the dispersion. A truly
terrifying scenario, one that would come true unless he could find Dr. Schiffer. If anyone
knew, it would be Peter Sido. The mere fact that he'd become agitated of late confirmed
that theory.
There was no doubt that he needed to see Dr. Peter Sido, the sooner the better.
"You realize you're just asking for trouble," Feyd al-Saoud said.
"I know that," Jamie Hull replied. "But Boris forced it on me. You know he's a
sonuvabitch as well as I do."
"First of all," Feyd al-Saoud said evenly, "if you insist on calling him Boris, there can
be no further discussion. You're doomed to a blood feud." He spread his hands. "Perhaps
it's my failing, Mr. Hull, so I would ask you to explain to me why you'd want to further
complicate an assignment that's already taxing all our security skills."
The two agents were inspecting the Oskjuhlid Hotel's HVAC system in which they'd
installed both heat-sensitive infrared and motion detectors. This foray was quite apart
from the daily inspection of the summit's forum HVAC the three agents undertook as a
team.
In a little over eight hours the first contingent of the negotiating parties would arrive.
Twelve hours after that, the leaders would present themselves and the summit would
begin. There was absolutely no margin for error for any of them, including Boris Illyich
Karpov.
"You mean you don't think he's a sonuvabitch?" Hull said.
Feyd al-Saoud checked a branching against the schematic he seemed to carry with him
at all times. "Frankly, I've had other things on my mind." Satisfied that the junction was
secure, Feyd al-Saoud moved on.
"Okay, let's cut to the chase."
Feyd al-Saoud turned to him. "I beg your pardon?"
"What I was thinking was that you and I make a good team. We get along well. When
it conies to security, we're on the same page."
"What you mean is, I follow your orders well."

Hull looked hurt. "Did I say that?"
"Mr. Hull, you didn't have to. You, like most Americans, are quite transparent. If
you're not in complete control, you tend to either get angry or sulk."
Hull felt himself flooding with resentment. "We're not children!" he cried.
"On the contrary," Feyd al-Saoud said equably, "there are times when you remind me
of my six-year-old son."
Hull wanted to pull his Clock 31 .357 mm and shove its muzzle in the Arab's face.
Where did he get off talking to a representative of the U.S. Government like that? It was
like spitting on the flag, for Christ's sake! But what good would a show offeree do him
now? No, much as he hated to admit it, he needed to go another way.
"So what d'you say?" he said as equably as he could.
Feyd al-Saoud appeared unmoved. "In all honesty, I'd prefer to see you and Mr.
Karpov work out your differences together."
Hull shook his head. "Ain't gonna happen, my friend, you know that as well as I do."
Unfortunately, Feyd al-Saoud did know that. Both Hull and Karpov were entrenched in
their mutual enmity. The best that could be hoped for now was that they'd confine
hostilities to taking the occasional potshot at each other without an escalation into all-out
war.
"I think I could best serve you both by maintaining a neutral position," he said now. "If
I don't, who's going to keep the two of you from rending each other limb from limb?"
After purchasing everything Bourne needed, Annaka left the men's clothes shop. As
she headed toward the theatrical district, she saw the reflection of movement behind her
in the shop window. She didn't hesitate or even break stride but slowed her pace enough
so that as she strolled she confirmed that she was being followed. As casually as she
could, she crossed the street, paused in front of a shop window. In it she recognized the
image of Kevin McColl as he crossed the street behind her, ostensibly heading toward a
cafe on the corner of the block. She knew that she had to lose him before she reached the
area of theatrical makeup shops.
Making sure he couldn't see, she pulled out her cell phone, dialed Bourne's number.
"Jason," she said softly, "McColTs picked me up."
"Where are you now?" he said.
"The beginning of Vaci utca."
"I'm not far away."
"I thought you weren't going to leave the hotel. What've you been doing?"
"I've discovered a lead," he said.
"Really?" Her heart beat fast. Had he found out about Stepan? "What is it?"
"First, we've got to deal with McColl. I want you to go to 75 Hattyu utca. Wait for me
at the front desk." He continued, giving her details of what she was to do.
She listened intently, then said, "Jason, are you sure you're up to this?" "Just do what I
tell you," he said sternly, "and everything will be fine." She disconnected and called a
taxi. When it came, she got in and gave the driver the address Bourne had made her

repeat back to him. As they drove off, she looked around but didn't see McColl, though
she was certain he'd been following her. A moment later a battered dark-green Opel
threaded its way through traffic, wedging itself behind her taxi. Annaka, peering into the
driver's off-side mirror, recognized the hulking figure behind the wheel of the Opel, and
her lips curled in a secret smile. Kevin McColl had taken the bait; now if only Bourne's
plan would work.
Stepan Spalko, newly returned to the Humanistas Ltd. headquarters in Budapest, was
monitoring the international clandestine service cipher traffic for news on the summit
when his cell phone rang.
"What is it?" he said tersely.
"I'm on my way to meet Bourne at 75 Hattyu utca," Annaka said.
Spalko turned and walked away from where his technicians were sitting at their
deciphering workstations. "He's sending you to the Eurocenter Bio-I Clinic," he said. "He
knows about Peter Sido."
"He said he had an exciting new lead, but he wouldn't tell me what it was."
"The man's relentless," Spalko said. "I'll take care of Sido, but you can't let him
anywhere near his office."
"I understand that," Annaka said. "In any event, Bourne's attention is initially going to
be directed toward the American CIA agent who's been shadowing him."
"I don't want Bourne killed, Annaka. He's far too valuable to me alive— at least for the
moment." Spalko's mind was sorting through possibilities, discarding them one by one
until he arrived at his desired conclusion. "Leave everything else to me."
Annaka, in the speeding taxi, nodded. "You can count on me, Stepan."
"I know that."
Annaka stared out the window at passing Budapest. "I never thanked you for killing
my father."
"It was a long time coming."
"Khan thinks I'm angry because I didn't get to do it myself."
"Is he right?"
There were tears in Annaka's eyes and with some annoyance she wiped them away.
"He was my father, Stepan. Whatever he did ... still, he was my father. He raised me."
"Poorly, Annaka. He never really knew how to be a father to you."
She thought about the lies she'd told Bourne without an iota of compunction, the
idealized childhood she'd wished for herself. Her father had never read to her at night or
changed her; he'd never once come to one of her graduations—it seemed he was always
far away; and as for birthdays, he'd never remembered. Another tear, escaping her
vigilance, crawled down her cheek and, at the corner of her mouth, she tasted its salt as if
it were the bitterness of memory.
She tossed her head. "A child can never fully condemn her father, it seems."
"I did mine."
"That was different," she said. "And, anyway, I know how you felt about my mother."

"I loved her, yes." In his mind Spalko conjured up an image of Sasa Vadas: her large,
luminous eyes, her creamy skin, the full bow of her mouth when that slow smile brought
you close to her heart. "She was completely unique, a special creature, a princess as her
name suggested."
"She was as much your family as she was mine," Annaka said. "She saw right through
you, Stepan. In her heart she felt the tragedies you'd suffered without you having to tell
her a thing."
"I waited a long time to take my revenge on your father, Annaka, but I never would've
done it if I didn't know it was what you wanted, too."
Annaka laughed, now fully back to herself. The brief emotional wallow she'd fallen
into disgusted her. "You don't expect me to believe that, do you, Stepan?"
"Now, Annaka—"
"Remember who you're trying to con. I know you, you killed him when it served your
purpose. And you were right, he would've told Bourne everything and Bourne would've
wasted no time coming after you with everything he had. That I'd wanted my father dead,
too, was mere coincidence."
"Now you're underestimating your importance to me."
"That may or may not be true, Stepan, but it doesn't matter to me. I wouldn't know how
to form an emotional attachment even if I wanted to try."
Martin Lindros presented his official papers to Randy Driver, Director of the Tactical
Non-Lethal Weapons Directorate in person. Driver, who was staring at Lindros as if he
had a chance of intimidating him, took the papers without comment and dropped them on
his desk.
He was standing as a marine would stand, straight-spined, gut in, muscles taut, as if he
were about to go into battle. His close-set blue eyes seemed almost crossed, such was his
concentration. A slight antiseptic scent lingered in the white-metal office, as if he'd seen
fit to fumigate the place in anticipation of Lindros' arrival.
"I see you've been a busy little beaver since last we met," he said, looking at no one in
particular. Apparently, he'd realized that he wouldn't be able to intimidate Lindros simply
with his stare. He was moving on to verbal intimidation.
"I'm always busy," Lindros said. "You just forced me into make-work." "Happy am I."
Driver's face fairly creaked with the tightness of his smile.
Lindros shifted from one foot to the other. "Why do you see me as the enemy?"
"Possibly because you are the enemy." Driver finally sat down behind his smokedglass and stainless-steel desk. "What else would you call someone who comes in here
wanting to dig up my backyard?"
"I'm only investigating—"
"Don't give that bullshit, Lindros!" Driver had leaped up, his face livid. "I can smell a
witch-hunt at a hundred paces! You're the Old Man's bloodhound. You can't fool me.
This isn't about Alex Conklin's murder."
"And why would you think that?"
"Because this investigation is about me!"

Now Lindros was really interested. Aware that Driver had given him the advantage, he
seized it with a knowing smile. "Now why would we want to investigate you, Randy?"
He'd chosen his words with care, using "we" to tell Driver that he was operating with the
full force of the DCI behind him and his first name to unnerve him.
"You already know why, damnit!" Driver stormed, falling into the trap Lindros had set
for him. "You must've known the first time you ambled in here. I could see it on your
face when you asked to talk to Felix Schiffer."
"I wanted to give you the chance to come clean before I went to the DCI." Lindros was
having fun following the path Driver was laying out, even though he had no idea where it
was leading. On the other hand, he had to be careful. One false move on his part, one
mistake and Driver would realize his ignorance and, likely as not, clam up, waiting for
advice from his lawyer. "It's not too late for you to do so now."
Driver stared at him for a moment, before pressing the heel of his hand to his damp
forehead. He slumped a little before falling back into his mesh chair.
"Christ Almighty, what a mess," he mumbled. As if having received a devastating
body blow, all the wind had gone out of him. He looked around at the Rothko prints on
the wall, as if they might be doorways through which he could flee. At last, finally
resigned to his fate, he let his gaze return to the man standing patiently in front of him.
He gestured. "Sit down, Deputy Director." His voice was sad. When Lindros had taken
his seat, he said, "It started with Alex Conklin. Well, it always started with Alex, didn't
it?" He sighed, as if all at once overcome by nostalgia. "Almost two years ago Alex came
to me with a proposition. He'd befriended a scientist at DARPA; the connection was
coincidental, though, to tell you the truth, Alex networked with so many people I doubt if
anything in his life was coincidence. I imagine you've worked out that the scientist in
question was Felix Schiffer."
He paused for a moment. "I'm dying for a cigar. D'you mind?"
"Knock yourself out," Lindros said. So that explained the smell: air freshener. The
building, like all government facilities, was supposed to be smoke-free.
"Care to join me?" Driver asked. "They were a present from Alex."
When Lindros declined, Driver pulled out a drawer, extracted a cigar from a humidor,
went through the complex ritual of lighting up. Lindros understood; he was calming his
nerves. He sniffed as the first puff of blue smoke wafted through the room. It was a
Cuban.
"Alex came to see me," Driver continued. "No, that's not quite accurate— he took me
out to dinner. He told me he'd met this guy who worked at DARPA. Felix Schiffer. He
hated the military types there and wanted out. Would I help his friend?"
"And you agreed," Lindros said, "just like that?"
"Of course, I did. General Baker, the head of DARPA, had poached one of our guys
last year." Driver took a puff on his cigar. "Payback's a bitch. I leaped at the chance to
stick it to that uptight asshole Baker."
Lindros stirred. "When Conklin came to you, did he tell you what Schiffer was
working on at DARPA?"

"Sure. Schiffer's field was pushing around airborne particulates. He was working on
methods to clear indoor areas infected with biologicals."
Lindros sat up. "Like anthrax?"
Driver nodded. "That's right."
"How far along was he?"
"At DARPA?" Driver shrugged. "I wouldn't know."
"But surely you'd gotten updates on his work after he came to work for you."
Driver glared at him, then pressed some keys on his computer terminal. He swivelled
the screen around so they could see.
Lindros leaned forward. "Looks like gibberish to me, but then I'm no scientist."
Driver stared at the end of his cigar as if now, at the moment of truth, he couldn't bring
himself to look at Lindros. "It is gibberish, more or less."
Lindros froze. "What the hell d'you mean?"
Driver was still staring with fascination at the end of his cigar. "This couldn't be what
Schiffer had been working on because it makes no sense."
Lindros shook his head. "I don't understand."
Driver sighed. "It's possible that Schiffer isn't much of a paniculate expert."
Lindros, who had begun feeling a ball of icy terror form in his gut, said, "There's
another possibility, isn't there?"
"Well, yes, now that you mention it." Driver ran his tongue around his lips. "It's
possible that Schiffer was working on something else entirely that he wanted neither
DARPA nor us to know about."
Lindros looked perplexed. "Why haven't you asked Dr. Schiffer about this?"
"I'd very much like to," Driver said. "The trouble is I don't know where Felix Schiffer
is."
"If you don't," Lindros said angrily, "who the hell does?"
"Alex was the only one who knew."
"Jesus H. Christ, Alex Conklin's dead!" Lindros rose and, leaning forward, swiped the
cigar out of Driver's mouth. "Randy, how long has Dr. Schiffer been missing?"
Driver closed his eyes. "Six weeks."
Now Lindros understood. This was why Driver had been so hostile when he'd first
come to him; he was terrified that the Agency suspected his egregious breach of security.
He said now, "How on earth did you allow this to happen?"
Driver's blue gaze rested on him for a moment. "It was Alex. I trusted him. Why
wouldn't I? I knew him for years—he was an Agency legend, for Christ's sake. And then
what does he up and do? He disappears Schiffer."
Driver stared at the cigar on the floor as if it had become a malignant object. "He used
me, Lindros, played me like a fiddle. He didn't want Schiffer in my directorate, he didn't
want us, the Agency, to have him. He wanted to get him away from DARPA so he could
disappear him."
"Why?" Lindros said. "Why would he do that?"

"I don't know. I wish to God I did."
The pain in Driver's voice was palpable, and for the first time since they'd met, Lindros
felt sorry for him. Everything he'd ever heard about Alexander Conklin had turned out to
be true. He was the master manipulator, the keeper of all the dark secrets, the agent who
trusted no one—no one save Jason Bourne, his protege". Fleetingly, he wondered what
this turn of events was going to do to the DCI. He and Conklin had been close friends for
decades; they'd grown up together in the Agency—it was their life. They'd relied on each
other, trusted each other, and now this bitterest blow. Conklin had breached just about
every major Agency protocol to get what he wanted: Dr. Felix Schiffer. He'd screwed not
only Randy Driver but the Agency itself. How was he ever going to protect the Old Man
from this news? Lindros wondered. But, even as he thought this, he knew that he had a
more pressing problem to deal with.
"Obviously, Conklin knew what Schiffer was really working on and wanted it,"
Lindros said. "But what the hell was it?"
Driver looked at him helplessly.
Stepan Spalko was standing in the center of Kapisztran ter, within shouting distance of
his waiting limo. Above him rose the Mary Magdalene Tower, all that was left of the
thirteenth-century Franciscan church, whose nave and chancel were destroyed by Nazi
bombs during World War II. As he waited, he felt a gust of chill wind raise the hem of
his black coat, insinuating itself against his skin.
Spalko glanced at his watch. Sido was late. Long ago, he'd trained himself not to worry,
but such was the significance of this meeting that he couldn't help but experience a
twinge of anxiety. At the top of the tower, the twenty-four-piece glockenspiel sounded
fifteen minutes after the hour. Sido was very late.
Spalko, watching the crowds ebb and flow, was just about to break protocol and call
Sido on the cell phone he'd given him when he saw the scientist hurrying toward him
from the opposite side of the tower. He was carrying something that looked like a
jeweler's sample case.
"You're late," Spalko said shortly.
"I know, but it couldn't be helped." Dr. Sido wiped his forehead with the sleeve of his
overcoat. "I had trouble getting the item out of storage. There was staff inside and I had
to wait until the cold room was empty so as not to arouse—"
"Not here, Doctor!"
Spalko, who wanted to hit him for talking about their business in public, took Sido
firmly by the elbow and all but frog-marched him deep into the desolate shadows thrown
by the rather forbidding baroque stone tower.
"You've forgotten to watch your tongue around outsiders, Peter," Spalko said. "We're
part of an elite group, you and I. I've told you that."
"I know," Dr. Sido said nervously, "but I find it difficult to—"
"You don't find it difficult to take my money, do you?"
Side's eyes slipped away. "Here's the product," he said. "It's everything you asked for
and more." He held out the case. "But let's get this over and done with quickly. I have to

get back to the lab. I was in the middle of a crucial chemical calculation when you
called."
Spalko pushed Sido's hand away. "You hold onto that, Peter, at least for a little while
longer."
Sido's spectacles flashed. "But you said you needed it now—immediately. As I told
you, once put in the portable case, the material is alive for only forty-eight hours."
"I haven't forgotten."
"Stepan, I'm at a loss. I took a great risk in bringing it out of the clinic during working
hours. Now I must get back or—"
Spalko smiled and, at the same time, tightened his grip on Sido's elbow. "You're not
going back, Peter."
"What?"
"I apologize for not mentioning it before, but, well, for the amount of money I'm
paying you, I want more than the product. I want you."
Dr. Sido shook his head. "But that's quite impossible. You know that!"
"Nothing is impossible, Peter, you know that."
"Well, this is," Dr. Sido said adamantly.
With a charming smile, Spalko produced a snapshot from inside his overcoat. "What
do they say about a picture's worth?" he said, handing it over.
Dr. Sido stared at it and swallowed convulsively. "Where did you get this photo of my
daughter?"
Spalko's smile stayed firmly in place. "One of my people took it, Peter. Look at the
date."
"It was taken yesterday." A sudden spasm overtook him and he tore the photo into
pieces. "One can do anything with a photographic image these days," he said stonily.
"How true," Spalko said. "But I assure you this one wasn't doctored."
"Liar! I'm leaving!" Dr. Sido said. "Let go of me."
Spalko did as the doctor asked, but as Sido started to walk away, he said, "Wouldn't
you like to talk with Roza, Peter?" He held out a cell phone. "I mean right now?"
Dr. Sido halted in midstep. Then he turned to face Spalko. His face was dark with
anger and barely suppressed fear. "You said you were Felix's friend; I thought you were
my friend."
Spalko continued to hold out the phone. "Roza would like to speak to you. If you walk
away now. .." He shrugged. His silence was its own threat.
Slowly, heavily, Dr. Sido came back. He took the cell phone in his free hand, put it up
to his ear. He found that his heart was beating so loudly he could scarcely think. "Roza?"
"Daddy? Daddy! Where am I? What's happening?"
The panic in his daughter's voice sent a lance of terror through Sido. He could never
remember being so afraid.
"Darling, what's going on?"

"Men came to my room, they took me, I don't know where, they put a hood over my
head, they—"
"That's enough," Spalko said, taking the phone from Dr. Sido's nerveless fingers. He
cut the connection, put the phone away.
"What have you done to her?" Dr. Sido's voice shook with the force of the emotions
running through him.
"Nothing yet," Spalko said easily. "And nothing will happen to her, Peter, as long as
you obey me."
Dr. Sido swallowed as Spalko resumed possession of him. "Where ... where are we
going?"
"We're taking a trip," Spalko said, guiding Dr. Sido toward the waiting limo. "Just
think of it as a vacation, Peter. A well-deserved vacation."

CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR
The Eurocenter Bio-I Clinic was housed in a modern stone building the color of lead.
Bourne entered with the quick authoritative strides of someone who knew where he was
going and why.
The interior of the clinic spoke of money, a great deal of it. The lobby was marble-clad.
Classical-looking columns were interspersed with bronze statuary. Along the walls were
arched niches in which resided the busts of the historical demigods of biology, chemistry,
microbiology and epidemiology. The ugly metal detector was particularly offensive in
this tranquil and monied setting. Beyond the skeletal structure was a high bank behind
which sat three harried-looking attendants.
Bourne passed through the metal detector without incident, his ceramic gun going
entirely unnoticed. At the front desk, he was all business.
"Alexander Conklin to see Dr. Peter Sido," he said so crisply that it was akin to being
an order.
"ID, please, Mr. Conklin," said one of the three female attendants, unconsciously
responding and snapping to.
Bourne handed over his false passport, which the attendant glanced at it, looking at
Bourne's face only long enough to make visual confirmation before returning it to Bourne.
She handed over a white plastic tag. "Please wear this at all times, Mr. Conklin." Such
was Bourne's tone and demeanor that she failed to ask if Sido was expecting him, taking
it for granted that "Mr. Conklin" had an interview with Dr. Sido. She provided the new
visitor with directions and Bourne set off.
"They require special ID tags to get into his section, white for visitors, green for
resident doctors, blue for assistants and support staff," Eszti Sido had told him, so his
immediate task was to find a likely member of the staff.
On his way to the Epidemiological Wing, he passed four men, none of whom were the
right somatotype. He needed someone who was more or less his size. Along the way he

tried every door that wasn't marked as an office or lab, looking for storage rooms and the
like, places that would be infrequently visited by the medical staff. He was unconcerned
with members of the cleaning crew, since it was likely that they wouldn't be in until the
evening.
At length he saw coming toward him a man in a white lab coat of more or less his
height and weight. He wore a green ID tag that identified him as Dr. Lenz Morintz.
"Excuse me, Dr. Morintz," Bourne said with a deprecating smile, "I wonder if you
could direct me to the Microbiological Wing. I seem to have lost my way."
"Indeed you have," Dr. Morintz said. "You're headed straight for the Epi-demiological
Wing."
"Oh, dear," Bourne said, "I really have got myself turned around."
"Not to worry," Dr. Morintz said. "Here's all you have to do."
As he turned to point Bourne in the right direction, Bourne chopped down with the
edge of his hand and the bacteriologist collapsed. Bourne caught him before he could hit
the floor. Standing him more or less upright, he half-carried, half-dragged the doctor back
to the nearest storage room, ignoring the searing pain from his cracked ribs.
Inside, Bourne turned on the light, took off his jacket, and stuffed it into a corner. Then
he stripped Dr. Morintz of his lab coat and ID. Using some spare surgical tape, he bound
the doctor's hands behind his back, taped his ankles tightly, and wrapped a final piece
across his mouth. Then he dragged the body into a corner, stashing it behind a couple of
large cartons. He returned to the door, turned off the light and went out into the corridor.
For a time after she arrived at the Eurocenter Bio-I Clinic, Annaka sat in the taxi while
the meter ran. Stepan had made it abundantly clear that they were now entering the
mission's final phase. Every decision they made, every move they took, was of critical
importance. Any mistake now could lead to disaster. Bourne or Khan. She didn't know
which was the greater wild card, which one presented the greatest danger. Of the two,
Bourne was the more stable, but Khan was without compunction. His similarity to her
was an irony she couldn't afford to ignore.
And yet it had occurred to her most recently that there were more differences that she'd
once imagined. For a start, he hadn't been able to bring himself to kill Jason Bourne,
despite his stated desire to do so. And then, just as startlingly, there was his lapse in her
Skoda when he'd leaned down to kiss the nape of her neck. From the moment she'd
walked out on him she'd wondered whether what he'd felt for her had been genuine. Now
she knew. Khan could feel; he could, if given enough incentive, forge emotional
attachments. Frankly, she'd never have believed it of him, not with his background.
"Miss?" the taxi driver's query broke into her thoughts. "Are you meeting someone
here or is there somewhere else you want me to take you?"
Annaka leaned forward, pressing a wad of bills into his hand. "This will be fine here."
Still she didn't move, but she looked around, wondering where Kevin McColl was. It
was easy for Stepan sitting safe in his office at Humanistas to tell her not to worry about
the CIA agent, but she was in the field with a capable and dangerous assassin and the
severely wounded man he was determined to kill. When the bullets began to fly, she was
the one who was going to be in the line of fire.

She got out at last, her agitation causing her to look up and down the block for the
battered green Opel before she caught herself and with a grunt of irritation went through
the front door of the clinic.
Inside, the setup was just as Bourne had described it to her. She wondered where he'd
gotten his information in such short order. She had to hand it to him; he had a remarkable
ability for ferreting out information.
Passing through the metal detector, she was stopped on the other side, was asked to
open her purse so the officer could peer through its contents. Following Bourne's
instructions to the letter, she approached the high marble bank, smiled at one of the three
attendants who looked up long enough to acknowledge her presence.
"My name is Annaka Vadas," she said. "I'm waiting for a friend."
The attendant nodded, went back to her work. The two others were either on the phone
or inputting data into a computer workstation. Another phone rang and the woman who'd
smiled at Annaka, picked up the receiver, spoke into it for a moment, then, astonishingly,
beckoned her over.
When Annaka approached the bank, the attendant said, "Miss Vadas. Dr. Morintz is
expecting you." She glanced briefly at Annaka's driver's license, then handed her a white
plastic ID tag. "Please wear that at all times, Miss Vadas. The doctor is waiting for you in
his laboratory."
She pointed the way and Annaka, baffled, followed her direction down a corridor. At
the first T-junction, she turned left and ran right into a man in a white lab coat.
"Oh, excuse me! What... ?" She'd looked up to see Jason Bourne's face. On his lab coat
was a green plastic ID tag with the name Dr. Lenz Morintz printed on it, and she started
to laugh. "Oh, I see, a pleasure to meet you, Dr. Morintz." She squinted. "Even though
you don't look all that much like your photo."
"You know how those cheap cameras are," Bourne said, taking her by the elbow and
leading her back to the corner she'd just turned. "They never do you justice." Peering
around the corner, he said, "Here comes the CIA, right on schedule."
Annaka saw Kevin McColl showing his credentials to one of the attendants. "How'd he
get his gun past the metal detector?" she asked.
"He didn't," Bourne said. "Why d'you think I directed you here?"
Despite herself, she looked at him with admiration. "A trap. McColl's here without a
gun." He was clever indeed, and this realization caused her a spark of concern. She hoped
Stepan knew what he was doing.
"Look, I discovered that Schiffer's former partner, Peter Sido, works here. If anyone
knows where Schiffer is, it's Sido. We need to speak with him, but first we've got to take
care of McColl once and for all. Are you ready?"
Annaka took a second look at McColl and, shuddering, nodded in assent.
Khan had used a taxi to tail the battered green Opel; he hadn't wanted to use the rental
Skoda in case it had been made. He waited for Kevin McColl to pull into a parking space,
then he had the taxi go past, and when the CIA agent got out of his Opel, he paid the
driver and started after the other on foot.

Last evening, following McColl from Annaka's, he had called Ethan Hearn and read
him off the license plate of the green Opel. Within the hour Hearn had gotten him the
name and number of the rental car location McColl had used. Posing as an Interpol agent,
he'd obtained from the suitably cowed attendant, McColl's name and address in the States.
He hadn't left a local address, but as it had turned out, with typical American arrogance,
he'd used his real name. It had been a simple matter, then, for Khan to call another
number, where a contact of his in Berlin had run McColl's name through his data banks
and come up with CIA.
Up ahead, McColl turned the corner onto Hattyu utca, entering a modern gray stone
building at 75 that had more than a passing resemblance to a medieval fortress. It was
fortunate that Khan waited a moment, as was his habit, because just then McColl ducked
out. Khan watched him, curious, as he went to a trash bin. Looking around to make sure
no one was paying him any attention, he drew out his gun, placed it quickly and carefully
into the bin.
Khan waited until McColl had returned inside, then continued on, passing through the
steel and glass door into the lobby. There, he observed McColl throwing around his
Agency credentials. Observing the metal detector, Khan realized why McColl had gotten
rid of his weapon. Was it coincidence or had Bourne set a trap for him? It's what Khan
himself would've done.
As McColl was given an ID tag and went down the corridor, Khan passed through the
metal detector, showed the Interpol ID he'd picked up in Paris. This, of course, alarmed
the attendant, especially after seeing the Agency man, and she wondered aloud whether
she should either alert the clinic's security or call the police, but Khan calmly assured her
that they were on the same case and were only here for interview purposes. Any
interruption in that process, he warned her sternly, could only lead to un-forseen
complications, which he knew she didn't want. Still slightly nervous, she nodded and
waved him through.
Kevin McColl saw Annaka Vadas up ahead and knew that Bourne had to be close by.
He was certain she hadn't made him, but in any event he fingered the small plastic square
attached to the wristband of his watch. Inside was a length of nylon line retracted onto a
tiny reel hidden within the plastic housing. He'd have preferred to complete the Bourne
sanction with a gun because it was quick and clean. The human body, no matter how
powerful, couldn't fight off a bullet to the heart or lungs or brain. Other methods using
surprise and brute force, which the presence of the metal detector was forcing him into
using, took longer and were more often than not messy. He understood the increased risk,
as well as the possibility that he would have to kill Annaka Vadas as well. That thought
alone caused him a pang of regret. She was a handsome, sexy woman; it went against the
grain to kill such beauty.
He saw her now, headed he was quite sure toward a rendezvous with Jason Bourne;
there was no other reason he could imagine for her to be here. He hung back, tapping the
plastic square lying against the inside of his wrist as he waited for his opportunity.
From his position inside a supply room, Bourne saw Annaka pass by. She knew
precisely where he was, but to her credit she didn't even turn her head a fraction as she

passed his vantage point. His keen ears detected McColl's tread before he even came into
view. Everyone had a way of walking, a certain stride that unless they deliberately altered
it became unmistakable. McColl's was heavy and solid, ominous, without doubt the gait
of a professional stalker.
The primary issue here, Bourne knew, was timing. If he moved too quickly, McColl
would see him and react, negating the element of surprise. If he waited too long, he'd be
forced to take a couple of steps to catch up to him and would risk McColl hearing him.
But Bourne had taken the measure of McColl's strides and so was able to accurately
anticipate when the CIA assassin would be in just the right spot. He pushed from his
mind the aches and pains in his body, most especially his cracked ribs. He had no idea
what a handicap they would place on him, but he had to be confident in the triple binding
Dr. Ambrus had used to protect them.
He could see Kevin McColl now, large and dangerous. Just as the agent passed the
partly open door to the supply room, Bourne leaped out and delivered a massive twohanded blow to McColl's right kidney. The agent's body canted over toward Bourne, who
grabbed him and began to drag him into the supply room.
But McColl whirled and, with a grimace of pain, exploded a massive fist into Bourne's
chest. Pain pinwheeled and, as Bourne staggered back, McColl drew out the nylon line,
lunging at Bourne's neck. Bourne used the edge of his hand to land two fierce blows that
must have caused McColl a great deal of pain. Still, he came on with reddened eyes and a
grim determination. He looped the nylon line around Bourne's neck, pulled so tight that
for the first instant Bourne was lifted off his feet.
Bourne fought for breath, which only allowed McColl to tighten the line further. Then
Bourne realized his mistake. He ceased to worry about breathing, concentrating on
freeing himself. His knee came up, making sharp contact with McColl's genitals. All the
breath went out of McColl, and for an instant his grip loosened enough for Bourne to get
two fingers between the nylon line and the flesh of his throat.
McColl, though, was a bull of a man, and he recovered more quickly than Bourne
could've imagined. With a grunt of rage, he drew all his energy into his arms, jerking the
nylon line more tightly than ever. But Bourne had managed to gain the advantage he
needed, and his two fingers curled, twisting as the line tightened, and it snapped just as a
powerful fish can exert enough torque to break the line on which it's caught.
Bourne used the hand that had been at his neck to strike out and up, catching McColl
under the jaw. McColl's head snapped back against the doorjamb, but as Bourne closed
with him, he used his elbows, spinning Bourne into the supply room. McColl came after
him, snatched up a box cutter, swung with it, slicing through the lab coat. Another swipe
and, though Bourne leaped back, the blade cut into his shirt so that it hung open,
revealing his bound ribs.
A grin of triumph lit up McColl's face. He knew a vulnerability when he saw it, and he
went after it. Switching the box cutter to his left hand, he feinted with it, then lowered a
massive blow toward Bourne's rib cage. Bourne wasn't fooled and was able to block the
blow with his forearm.
Now McColl saw his opening and swung in with the box cutter, directly toward
Bourne's exposed neck.

Having heard the first sounds of engagement, Annaka had turned, but she'd
immediately spotted two doctors coming toward the junction in the corridor beyond
which Bourne and McColl were locked together. Neatly interposing herself between them
and the doctors, she asked the doctors a barrage of questions, all the while moving them
along until they were past the junction.
Extricating herself as quickly as she could, she hurried back. By that time she saw that
Bourne was in trouble. Remembering Stepan's admonishment to keep Bourne alive, she
rushed back down the corridor. By the time she arrived, the two combatants were already
inside the supply room. She swung in through the open door just in time to see McColTs
vicious attack at Bourne's neck.
She hurled herself at him, knocking him off stride just enough so that the box cutter
blade, flashing in the light, flew by Bourne's neck, sparking off the metal corner of a shelf
stanchion. McColl, aware of her now in the periphery of his vision, whirled, his left
elbow high and cocked, and he smashed it back into her throat.
Annaka gagged, reflexively grabbed at her neck as she began to sink down onto her
knees. McColl came at her with the box cutter, slashing at her coat. Bourne took the
length of nylon still gripped in one hand and lashed it around McColl's neck from behind.
McColl arched back, but instead of grasping for his throat, he jammed an elbow into
Bourne's cracked ribs. Bourne saw stars, but still he held on, inching McColl backward,
away from Annaka, hearing his heels dragging on the floor tiles as McColl flailed at his
ribs with ever-increasing desperation.
The blood pooled in McColl's head, the cords stood out on the sides of his neck like
taut ropes, and soon thereafter, his eyes began to bulge in their sockets. Blood vessels
burst in his nose and cheeks and his lips pulled back from his pallid gums. His swollen
tongue swirled around his gasping mouth, and still he had it in him to deliver one last
blow to Bourne's side. Bourne winced, his grip faltered slightly, and McColl began to
regain his balance.
That's when Annaka recklessly kicked him in the stomach. McColl grabbed her raised
knee and, twisting violently, brought her back against him. His left arm whipped around
her neck, the heel of his right hand positioned itself against the side of her head. He was
about to break her neck.
Khan, observing all this from the vantage point of the small darkened office across and
slightly down the corridor, watched Bourne, at great risk to himself, let go of the nylon
cord he'd so expertly wrapped around McColl's neck. He slammed the assassin's head
against a shelf, then drove a thumb into his eye.
McColl, about to scream, found Bourne's forearm between his jaws, and so the sound
rattled in his lungs, dying inside him. He kicked out and flailed, refusing to die or even to
go down. Bourne withdrew his ceramic gun, smashed the butt into the soft spot over
McColl's left ear. Now he was on his knees, his head shaking, his hands moving to press
themselves tightly to his ruined eye. But it was only a ruse. He used his hands to trip
Annaka, to bring her down to his level. His murderous hands grasped her, and Bourne,
without any other recourse, pressed the muzzle of the gun against McColl's flesh and
pulled the trigger.

There was very little noise, but the hole in McColl's neck was impressive. Even dead,
McColl wouldn't let go of Annaka, and Bourne, putting away the gun, was obliged to pry
his fingers one by one off her flesh.
Bourne reached down, pulled her up, but Khan could see his grimace, saw one hand
press against his side. Those ribs. Were they bruised, broken, or something in between?
he wondered.
Khan moved back into the shadows of the empty office. He'd caused that injury. He
could remember in vivid detail the power he'd put behind the blow, the feel of his hand as
it made contact, the almost electric jarring that had passed through him, as if from Bourne.
But, curiously, the feeling of hot satisfaction never materialized. Instead, he was forced to
admire the strength and tenacity of the man to hold on, to continue his titanic struggle
with McColl, despite the beating he was taking in his most vulnerable spot.
Why was he even thinking these thoughts? he asked himself angrily. Bourne had done
nothing but reject him. In the face of mounting evidence, he adamantly refused to believe
that Khan was his son. What did that say about him? For whatever reason, he'd chosen to
believe that his son was dead. Didn't that mean that he'd never wanted him in the first
place?
"The support staff arrived just a few hours ago," Jamie Hull said to the DCI over their
secure video linkup. "We've familiarized them with everything. All that's lacking is the
principals."
"The president's in the air even as we speak," the DCI said as he waved Martin Lindros
to a seat. "In approximately five hours, twenty minutes from now, the President of the
United States will be on Icelandic soil. I hope to Christ you're ready for him."
"Absolutely I am, sir. We all are."
"Excellent." But his frown deepened as he glanced down at the notes on his desktop.
"Give me an update on how you're handling Comrade Karpov?"
"Not to worry," Hull said. "I have the Boris situation under control."
"That's a relief. Relations between the president and his Russian counterpart are
strained as it is. You've no idea what blood, sweat and tears it took to persuade Aleksandr
Yevtushenko to come to the table. Can you imagine the blowup if he hears you and his
top security man are ready to slit each other's throats?"
"It'll never happen, sir."
"Damned straight," the DCI growled. "Keep me informed 24-7."
"Will do, sir," Hull said, signing off.
The DCI swiveled around, ran his hand through his shock of white hair. "We're in the
final stretch, Martin. Does it pain you as much as it pains me to be stuck here behind a
desk while Hull is taking care of business in the field?"
"It does, indeed, sir." Lindros, keeping his secret close to the vest for all this time,
almost lost his nerve then, but duty won out over compassion. He didn't want to wound
the Old Man, no matter how badly he'd been treated recently.
He cleared his throat. "Sir, I've just come from seeing Randy Driver."
"And?"

Lindros took a deep breath and told the Old Man what Driver had confessed, that
Conklin had brought Dr. Felix Schiffer over to the Agency from DARPA for his own
dark and unknown reasons, that he had deliberately "disappeared" Schiffer and that now
that Conklin was dead no one knew where Schiffer was.
The Old Man's fist slammed down on his desk. "Sweet Christ, to have one of our
directorate scientists gone missing with the summit about to start is a catastrophe of the
first rank. If the bitch-woman should get wind of this, it'll be my ass in a sling, no ifs,
ands or buts."
For a moment nothing stirred in the vast corner office. The photos of world leaders
past and present looked back at the two men with mute rebuke.
At last the DCI stirred. "Are you saying that Alex Conklin stole a scientist out from
under DOD's nose and stashed him with us so he could whisk him away to God knows
where and for what unknown purpose?"
Lindros, folding his hands in his lap, said nothing, but he knew better than to move his
gaze away from the Old Man's.
"Well, that's ... I mean to say, we don't do that in the Agency, and most especially
Alexander Conklin wouldn't do that. He would be breaking every rule in the playbook."
Lindros stirred, thinking of his research in the top-secret Four-Zero Archives. "He did
it often enough in the field, sir. You know that."
Indeed, the DCI did, only too well. "This is different," he protested. "This happened
here at home. It's a personal affront to the Agency, and to me." The Old Man shook his
craggy head. "I refuse to believe it, Martin. Goddammit, there must be another
explanation!"
Lindros held firm. "You know there isn't. I'm truly sorry to have been the one to bring
you this news, sir."
At that moment the Old Man's secretary entered the room, handed him a slip of paper,
and went out. The DCI unfolded the note.
"Your wife would like to speak with you," he read. "She says it's important."
He crumpled the note, then looked up. "Of course there's another explanation. Jason
Bourne."
"Sir?"
The DCI looked straight at Lindros and said bleakly, "This is Bourne's doing, not
Alex's. It's the only explanation that makes sense."
"For the record, I think you're wrong, sir," Lindros said, gathering himself for the
uphill battle. "With all due respect, I think you've allowed your personal friendship with
Alex Conklin to cloud your judgment. After studying the Four-Zero files, I believe that
no one alive was closer to Conklin than Jason Bourne, even you."
A Cheshire cat smile spread across the DCI's face. "Oh, you're right about that one,
Martin. And it's because Bourne knew Alex so well that he was able to capitalize on
Alex's involvement with this Dr. Schiffer. Believe me, Bourne smelled something and he
went after it."
"There's no proof—"

"Ah, but there is." The DCI shifted in his chair. "As it happens, I know where Bourne
is."
"Sir?" Lindros fairly goggled at him.
"106-108 Fo utca," the DCI read off a slip of paper. "That's in Budapest." The DCI
threw his deputy a hard look. "Didn't you tell me that the gun used to murder Alex and
Mo Panov was paid for out of an account in Budapest?"
Lindros' heart contracted. "Yes, sir."
The DCI nodded. "That's why I gave this address to Kevin McColT Lindros' face went
white. "Oh, Christ. I want to talk to McColl."
"I feel your pain, Martin, really I do." The DCI nodded toward the phone. "Call him if
you like, but you know McColl's record for efficiency.
Chances are Bourne is already dead."
Bourne kicked the door to the supply room closed, stripped off the bloody lab coat. He
was about to drop it over the corpse of Kevin McColl when he noticed a small LED light
blinking at McColl's hip. His cell phone. Squatting down, he picked it out of its plastic
holster, opened it up. He saw the number and knew who was calling. Rage filled his heart.
Opening the connection, he said to the DCI, "Keep this up and you'll be paying the
undertakers overtime."
"Bourne!" Lindros cried. "Wait!"
But he didn't wait. Instead, he threw the cell phone so hard against the wall it split open
like an oyster.
Annaka watched him carefully. "An old enemy?"
"An old fool," Bourne growled, retrieving his leather jacket. He grunted involuntarily
as the pain struck him a hammer blow.
"It appears that McColl gave you quite a beating," Annaka said.
Bourne slipped on his jacket with its white visitor's ID tag in order to cover his slit
shirt. His mind was completely focused on finding Dr. Sido. "And what about you? How
badly did McColl hurt you?"
She refused to rub the red welt at her throat. "Don't worry about me."
"We won't worry about each other, then," Bourne said as he took a bottle of cleaner
from the shelf and, using a rag, wiped the blood stains off her coat as best he could.
"We've got to get to Dr. Sido as quickly as possible. Dr. Morintz is bound to be missed
sooner or later."
"Where's Sido?"
"In the Epidemiological Wing." He gestured. "Come on."
He peered around the doorjamb, checking to make sure no one was around. As they
emerged into the corridor, he registered that an office door across the way was partially
open. He took a step toward it but heard voices approaching from that direction and he
hurried them away. He needed a moment to reorient himself, then he took them through a
set of swinging doors into the Epidemiological Wing.
"Sido's in 902," he said, scanning the numbers on the doors they passed.

The wing was in actuality a square with an open space in its center. Doors to labs and
offices were set at intervals along the four walls, the only exception being a barred metal
exit door, locked from the outside which was in the center of the far wall. Obviously the
Epidemiological Wing was at the back of the clinic because it was clear from the
markings on the small storerooms to either side that the door was used to remove
hazardous medical waste.
"There's his lab," Bourne said, hurrying ahead.
Annaka, just behind him, saw the fire alarm box on the wall ahead of her, precisely
where Stepan said it would be. As she came abreast of it, she lifted the glass. Bourne was
knocking on the door to Sido's lab. Receiving no answer, he opened the door. Just as he
stepped into Dr. Sido's lab, Annaka pulled down the handle and the fire alarm went off.
The wing was suddenly filled with people. Three members of the clinic's security force
appeared; it was obvious that these were extremely efficient people. Bourne, desperate
now, looked around Sido's empty office. He noticed a mug half-filled with coffee, the
computer screen lit with a screen saver. He pressed the "Escape" key, and the upper part
of the screen filled with a complex chemical equation. The lower half had the following
legend: "Product must be kept at -32 degrees Celsius as it is extremely fragile. Heat of
any kind renders it instantly inert." Through the mounting chaos, Bourne was thinking
furiously. Though Dr. Sido wasn't here, he had been here not long ago. All evidence
pointed to him having left in a hurry.
At that moment Annaka rushed in and pulled at him. "Jason, the clinic's security is
asking questions, checking everyone's ID. We've got to get out of here now." She led him
to the doorway. "If we can make it to the rear exit, we can escape that way."
Out in the open space of the wing, chaos reigned. The alarm had triggered sprays of
water. As there was a great deal of flammable material in the labs, including oxygen
tanks, the staff was understandably panicking. Security, trying to get a grip on who was
present, was having to deal with calming the clinic's personnel.
Bourne and Annaka were heading toward the metal exit door when Bourne saw Khan
working his way through the stampeding crowd toward them. Bourne grabbed Annaka,
interposed himself between her and the oncoming Khan. What was Khan's intention, he
wondered. Did he mean to kill them or to intercept them? Did he expect Bourne to tell
him everything he'd discovered about Felix Schiffer and the biochemical diffuser? But no,
there was something different about Khan's expression, some clockwork calculation that
was missing.
"Listen to me!" Khan said, trying to make himself heard above the noise. "Bourne,
you've got to listen to me!"
But Bourne, herding Annaka, had reached the metal exit door and, crashing through it,
hurtled into the alley behind the clinic, where a HAZ-MAT truck was parked. Six men
armed with machine-guns stood in front of it. Bourne, instantly recognizing it as a trap,
turned and instinctively shouted at Khan, who was coming on behind him.
Annaka, swinging around, saw Khan at last and ordered two of the men to open fire.
But Khan, heeding Bourne's warning, leaped aside a split-second before the hail of
bullets mowed down the clinic's security detail that had come to investigate. Now all hell
broke loose inside the clinic, as staff ran, screaming, through the swinging doors, down
the corridor toward the front entrance.

Two of the men grabbed Bourne from behind. He whirled, engaging them.
"Find him," he heard Annaka shout. "Find Khan and kill him!"
"Annaka, what—"
Bourne, stunned, watched the pair that had fired race past him, leaping over the
wreckage of the bullet-ridden bodies.
Bourne, pushing himself to action, smashed one man in the face, putting him down, but
another took his place.
"Careful," Annaka warned. "He's got a gun!"
One of the men shackled Bourne's arms behind his back while a second scrabbled for
the weapon. He wrestled free, chopped down hard, breaking his would-be captor's nose.
Blood gushed and the man fell back, his hands cupping the center of his ruined face.
"What the hell are you doing?"
Then Annaka, armed with a machine pistol, stepped in, slammed him hard with its
thick butt in his cracked ribs. All the breath went out of him and he canted over, losing
his balance. His knees were like rubber and the agony that racked him was for a moment
unbearable. Then they'd grabbed hold of him. One man punched him in the side of the
head. Bourne sagged again in their arms.
The two men returned from their recon of the clinic wing. "No sign of him," they
reported to Annaka.
"No matter," she said, and pointed to the man writhing on the ground. "Get him into
the vehicle. Hurry now!"
She turned back to Bourne, saw the man with the broken nose was pressing a gun to
the side of Bourne's head. His eyes blazed with fury and he seemed intent on pulling the
trigger.
Annaka said calmly but firmly. "Put the gun down. He's to be taken alive." She stared
at him, not moving a muscle. "Spalko's orders. You know that." At length the man put the
gun up.
"All right," she said. "Into the truck."
Bourne stared at her, his mind was ablaze with her betrayal.
Smirking, Annaka held out a hand and one of the men handed her a hypodermic filled
with a clear liquid. With a swift and sure motion, she emptied the hypodermic into
Bourne's vein, and slowly his eyes lost focus.

CHAPTER TWENTY-FIVE
Hasan Arsenov had put Zina in charge of the physical aspect of the cadre, as if she
were a stylist. She took her orders seriously as she always did, though not without a
private snicker of cynicism. Like a planet to a sun, she was aligned with the Shaykh now.
As was her way, she had mentally and emotionally removed herself from Hasan's orbit. It
had begun that night in Budapest—though, in truth, the seeds must have been planted
earlier— and had come to fruition under the burning sun of Crete. She clove to their time

together on the Mediterranean island as if it were her own private legend, one she shared
only with him. They'd been—what?—Theseus and Ariadne. The Shaykh had recounted
the myth of the Minotaur's terrible life and bloody death to her. Together, she and the
Shaykh had entered a real-life labyrinth and triumphed. In the fever of these newly
precious memories, it never occurred to her that this was a Western myth in which she
had inserted herself, that in aligning herself with Stepan Spalko, she had moved away
from Islam, which had nurtured her, raised her like a second mother, had been her succor,
her only solace in the dark days of the Russian occupation. It never occurred to her that to
embrace one, she had to let go of the other. And even if it had, with her cynic's nature,
she might have made the same choice.
Because of her knowledge and diligence the men of the cadre that arrived in twilit
Keflavik Airport were clean-shaven, barbered in the European style, dressed in dark
Western business suits, so bland they made themselves virtually anonymous. The women
were without traditional khidzhab, the scarf that covered their faces. Their bare faces
were made up in the European style and they were clothed in sleek Parisian fashions.
They passed through Immigration without incident, using the false identities and forged
French passports Spalko had provided.
Now, as Arsenov had ordered, they were careful to speak only Icelandic, even when
they were alone together. At one of the rental companies counters in the terminal,
Arsenov rented one car and three vans for the cadre, which was composed of six men and
four women. While Arsenov and Zina took the car into Reykjavik, the rest of the cadre
drove the vans south of the city to the town of Hafnarfjordur, the oldest trading port in
Iceland, where Spalko had rented a large clapboard house on a cliff overlooking the
harbor. The colorful village of small, quaint clapboard houses was surrounded on the land
side by lava flows, filled with mist and a sense of being lost in time. It was possible to
imagine among the brightly painted fishing boats lying side by side in the harbor warshield-bedecked Viking longships readying themselves for their next bloody campaign.
Arsenov and Zina drove through Reykjavik, familiarizing themselves with the streets
they'd previously seen only on maps, getting a sense of traffic and travel patterns. The
city was picturesque, built on a peninsula so that it was possible to see the white snowencrusted mountains or the piercing blue-black North Atlantic ocean from almost any
place you stood. The island itself was created from the shift of tectonic plates as the
American and Eurasian landmasses pulled apart. Because of the relative youth of the
island, the crust was thinner than on either of the surrounding continents, which
accounted for the remarkable abundance of geothermal activity used to heat Icelandic
homes. The entire city was connected to the Reykjavik Energy hot water pipeline.
In City Centre, they cruised past the modern and peculiarly unsettling Hallgrimskirkja
Church, looking like a rocket ship out of science fiction. It was by far the tallest structure
in what was otherwise a low-rise city. They found the health services building and drove
from there to the Oskjuhlid Hotel.
"You're sure this is the route they'll take?" Zina said.
"Absolutely." Arsenov nodded. "It's the shortest way and they'll want to get to the hotel
as quickly as possible."
The hotel's periphery was teeming with American, Arab and Russian security.

"They've turned it into a fortress," Zina said.
"Just as the Shaykh's photos showed us," Arsenov replied with a small smile. "How
much personnel they have makes no difference to us."
They parked and went from shop to shop, making their various purchases. Arsenov had
been far happier inside the metal shell of their rented car. Mingling with the crowds, he
was acutely aware of his own alienness. How different these slim, light-skinned, blueeyed people were! With his black hair and eyes, his big bones and swarthy skin, he felt as
graceless as a Neanderthal among Cro-Magnons. Zina, he discovered, had no such
difficulties. She took to new places, new people, new ideas with a frightening zeal. He
worried about her, worried about her influence on the children they would one day have.
Twenty minutes after the operation at the rear of the Eurocenter Bio-I Clinic, Khan still
wondered when he'd ever felt more strongly the urge to retaliate against an enemy. Even
though he'd been outmanned and outgunned, even though the rational part of his mind—
usually so in control of every action he took—understood all too well the foolhardiness of
launching a counterattack against the men Spalko had sent to get him and Jason Bourne,
another part of him had been determined to fight back. Strangely, it was Bourne's
warning that had brought out in him the irrational desire to hurl himself into the pitched
battle and rend Spalko's men limb from limb. It was a feeling that came from the very
core of him, and so powerful was it that it had taken all his rational willpower to pull
back, to hide from the men Annaka had sent in to find him. He could have taken those
two down, but of what use would it have been? Annaka would only have sent more of
them in for him.
He was sitting in Grendel, a cafe about a mile from the clinic, which was now crawling
with police and, probably, Interpol agents. He sipped at his double espresso and thought
about the primal feeling in which he still felt gripped. Once again, he saw the look of
concern on Jason Bourne's face when he saw Khan about to step into the trap in which he
was already ensnared. As if he'd been more concerned with keeping Khan out of danger
than with his own safety. But that was impossible, wasn't it?
Khan was not in the habit of replaying recent scenarios, but he found himself doing so
now. As Bourne and Annaka had headed for the exit, he'd tried to warn Bourne about her,
but he'd been too late. What had motivated him to do that? Certainly, he hadn't planned
on it. It was a spur-of-themoment decision. Or was it? He recalled, with a vividness he
found unsettling, his feeling when he'd seen the damage he'd done to Bourne's ribs. Had it
been remorse? Impossible!
It was maddening. The thought would not let him be: the moment when Bourne had
made the choice between staying safe behind the deadly creature McColl had become or
putting himself in harm's way in order to protect Annaka. Up until that moment, he'd
been trying to reconcile the notion of David Webb, college professor, being Jason Bourne,
international assassin, of being in his line of work. But no assassin he could think of
would have endangered himself to protect Annaka.
Who, then, was Jason Bourne?
He shook his head, annoyed at himself. This was a question, though maddening, that
he needed to put aside for the time being. At last he understood why Spalko had called
him while he was in Paris. He'd been given a test and, to Spalko's way of thinking, he'd

failed. Spalko now thought of Khan as an imminent threat to him, just as he thought of
Bourne as a threat. For Khan, Spalko had become the enemy. All his life, Khan had only
one way of dealing with enemies: He eliminated them. He was very well aware of the
danger; he welcomed it as a challenge. Spalko was certain he could defeat Khan. How
could Spalko know that that arrogance would only make him burn all the brighter?
Khan drained his small cup and, flipping open his cell phone, punched in a number.
"I was just about to call you but I wanted to wait until I was out of the building," Ethan
Hearn said. "Something's up."
Khan checked his watch. It wasn't yet five. "What, exactly?"
"About two minutes ago I saw a HAZMAT truck approaching and I got down to the
basement in time to see two men and a woman bringing a man in on a stretcher."
"That woman will be Annaka Vadas," Khan said.
"She's quite the stunner."
"Listen to me, Ethan," Khan said forcefully, "if you run into her, be very careful. She's
as dangerous as they come."
"Too bad," Hearn mused.
"No one saw you?" Khan wanted to get him off the subject of Annaka Vadas.
"No," Hearn said. "I was quite careful about that."
"Good." Khan thought a moment. "Can you find out where they took this man? I mean
the exact location?"
"I already know. I watched the elevator when they took him up. He's somewhere on the
fourth floor. That's Spalko's personal level; it's accessed only with a magnetic key."
"Can you get it?" Khan asked.
"Impossible. He keeps it on his person at all times."
"I'll have to find another way," Khan said.
"I thought magnetic keys were foolproof."
Khan laughed shortly. "Only a fool believes that. There's always a way into a locked
room, Ethan, just as there's always a way out."
Khan rose, threw some money on the table, and walked out of the cafe. Right now he
was loath to stay in one place for too long. "Speaking of which, I need a way into
Humanistas."
"There are any number—"
"I have reason to believe Spalko is expecting me." Khan crossed the street, his eyes
alert for anyone who might be watching him.
"That's a completely different story," Hearn said. There was a pause as he considered
the problem, then: "Wait a minute, hang on. Let me look in my PDA. I might have
something.
"Okay, I'm back." Hearn gave a little laugh. "I do have something, and I think you're
going to like it.

Arsenov and Zina arrived at the house ninety minutes after the others. By that time, the
cadre had changed into jeans and workshirts and had pulled the van into the large garage.
While the women took charge of the bags of food Arsenov and Zina had bought, the men
opened the box of hand weapons waiting for them and helped set up the spray-painters.
Arsenov took out the photos Spalko had given him and they set about spray-painting
the van the proper color of an official government vehicle. While the van was drying,
they drove the second van into the garage. Using a stencil, they spray-painted
Hafnarfjordur Fine Fruits <& Vegetables onto both sides of the vehicle.
Then they went into the house, which was already perfumed by the meal the women
had prepared. Before sitting down to eat, they commenced their prayers. Zina, excitement
buzzing through her like an electrical current, was barely present, praying to Allah by
rote while she thought of the Shaykh and her role in the triumph that was now only a day
away.
At dinner the conversation was spirited, a flux of tension and anticipation animating
them. Arsenov, who normally frowned on such loose behavior, allowed this outlet for
their nerves, but only for a contained amount of time. Leaving the women to clean up, he
led the men back down to the garage, where they applied the official decals and markings
to the sides and front of the van. They drove that outside, brought the third one in, spraypainted it the colors of Reykjavik Energy.
Afterward they were all exhausted and ready for sleep, for they would be rising very
early. Still, Arsenov made them run through their parts of the plan, insisting they speak
Icelandic. He wanted to see what effect mental fatigue would have on them. Not that he
doubted them. All of his nine compatriots had long ago proven themselves to him. They
were physically strong, mentally tough and, perhaps most important of all, completely
without remorse or compunction. However, none of them had ever been involved in an
operation of this size, scope or global ramifications; without the NX 20 they'd never had
the wherewithal. And so it was particularly satisfying to watch them dredge up the
necessary reserves of energy and stamina to run through their roles with flawless
precision.
He congratulated them and then, as if they were his blood children, said to them with
great love and affection in his heart, "La illaha ill Allah."
"La illaha ill Allah," they chorused in unison with such love burning in their eyes that
Arsenov was moved close to tears. In this moment, as they searched one another's faces,
the enormity of the task set before them was brought home to them. For Arsenov's part,
he saw them all—his family— gathered together in a strange and forbidding land, on the
brink of the most glorious moment their people would ever witness. Never had his sense
of the future burned so brilliantly, never had his sense of purpose— the righteousness—
of their cause been made so manifest to him. He was grateful for the presence of all of
them.
As Zina was about to go upstairs, he put a hand on her arm, but as the others passed
her, glancing at them, she shook her head. "I have to help them with the peroxide," she
said, and he let her go.
"May Allah grant you a peaceful sleep," she said softly, mounting the stairs.

Later, Arsenov lay in bed unable, as usual, to sleep. Across from him, in the other
narrow bed, Akhmed snored with the noise of a buzzsaw. A light wind ruffled the
curtains of the open window; as a youth, Arsenov had grown used to the cold; now he
liked it. He stared up at the ceiling, thinking as he always did in the dark hours of Khalid
Murat, of his betrayal of his mentor and his friend. Despite the necessity of the
assassination, his personal disloyalty continued to eat at him. And there was the wound in
his leg, a pain no matter how well it was healing that acted as a goad. In the end he'd
failed Khalid Murat, and nothing he could do now could change that fact.
He rose, went into the hallway and padded silently down the stairs. He'd slept in his
clothes, as he always did. He went out into the chill night air, extracting a cigarette and
lighting it. Low on the horizon a bloated moon sailed through the star-spangled sky.
There were no trees; he heard no insects.
As he walked farther away from the house, his seething mind began to clear, to calm
itself. Perhaps, after he'd finished the cigarette he'd even be able to catch a few hours of
sleep before the three-thirty rendezvous with Spalko's boat.
He had almost finished his cigarette and was about to turn around when he heard the
whisper of low voices. Startled, he drew his gun and looked around. The voices, drifting
on the night air, were coming from behind a pair of enormous boulders that rose up like
the horns of a monster from the top of the cliff's face.
Dropping his cigarette and grinding its lit end into the ground, he moved toward the
rock formation. Though he used caution, he was fully prepared to empty his weapon into
the hearts of whoever was spying on them.
But as he peered around the curving face of the rock, it wasn't infidels he saw but Zina.
She was talking in low tones to another, larger figure, but from his angle Arsenov could
not tell who it was. He moved slightly, drawing closer. He couldn't hear their words, but
even before he noticed Zina's hand on the other's arm, he had recognized the voice she
used when she was set on seducing him.
He pressed his fist to his temple as if to stop the sudden throbbing in his head. He
wanted to scream as he watched the fingers of Zina's hand draw up into what looked to
him like spider's legs, her nails scoring the forearm of... who was it she was trying to
seduce? His jealousy goaded him to action. At the risk of being seen, he moved farther,
part of him entering the moonlight, until the face of Magomet came into view.
Blind rage gripped him; he was shaking all over. He thought of his mentor. What
would Khalid Murat have done? he asked himself. Doubtless, he would have confronted
the pair, heard their separate explanations of what they were doing and then made his
judgment accordingly.
Arsenov stood up to his full height and, advancing on the pair, held his right arm out
straight in front of him. Magomet, who was more or less turned facing him, saw him and
abruptly stepped back, severing the hold Zina had on him. His mouth opened wide, but in
his shock and terror, nothing came out.
"Magomet, what is it?" Zina said and, turning, saw Arsenov advancing on them.
"Hasan, no!" she cried just as Arsenov pulled the trigger.
The bullet entered Magomet's open mouth and blew the back of his head off. He was
thrown backward in a welter of blood and brains.

Arsenov turned the gun on Zina. Yes, he thought, Khalid Murat would surely have
handled the situation differently, but Khalid Murat was dead and he, Hasan Arsenov, the
architect of Murat's demise, was alive and in charge, and this was why. It was a new
world.
"Now you," he said.
Staring into his black eyes, she knew that he wanted her to grovel, to get down on her
knees and beg him for mercy. He could care less about any explanation she might give
him. She knew that he was beyond reason; at this moment he wouldn't know the truth
from a clever concoction. She also knew that giving him what he wanted at the moment
he wanted it was a trap, a slippery slope once embarked upon impossible to get off. There
was only one way to stop him in his tracks.
Her eyes blazed. "Stop it!" she ordered. "Right now!" Reaching out, she closed her
fingers around the barrel of the gun, drew it upward so that it was no longer pointed at
her head. She risked a quick glance at the dead Magomet. That was a mistake she
wouldn't make twice.
"What's come over you?" she said. "So close to our shared goal, have you lost your
mind?"
She was clever to have reminded Arsenov of their reason for being in Reykjavik For
the moment, his devotion to her had blinded him to the larger goal. All he'd reacted to
was her voice and her hand on Magomet's arm.
With a ragged motion, he put the gun away.
"Now what will we do?" she said. "Who'll take over Magomet's responsibilities?"
"You caused this," he said with disgust. "You figure it out."
"Hasan." She knew better than to try to touch him at this moment or even to come
closer than she already was. "You are our leader. It's your decision and yours alone."
He looked around, as if just coming out of a trance. "I suspect our neighbors will
assume the report of the gunshot was merely a truck backfiring." He stared at her. "Why
were you out here with him?"
"I was trying to dissuade him from the path he'd chosen," Zina said carefully.
"Something happened to him when I shaved his beard on the plane. He made overtures."
Arsenov's eyes blazed anew. "And what was your response?"
"What d'you imagine it was, Hasan?" she said, her hard voice matching his. "Are you
saying that you don't trust me?"
"I saw your hand on him, your fingers...." He could not go on.
"Hasan, look at me." She reached out. "Please look at me."
He turned slowly, reluctantly, and elation rose inside her. She had him; despite her
error in judgment, she still had him.
Breathing an inaudible sigh of relief, she said, "The situation required some delicacy.
Surely you can understand that. If I turned him down flat, if I was cold to him, if I
angered him, I was afraid of a reprisal. I was afraid his anger would impair his use to us."
Her eyes held his. "Hasan, I was thinking of the reason we're here. That's my only focus
now, as it should be yours."

He stood immobile for long moments, absorbing her words. The hiss and suck of the
waves spending themselves against the cliffs far below seemed unnaturally loud. Then,
abruptly, he nodded and the incident was swept away. That was his way.
"All that remains is to dispose of Magomet."
"We'll wrap him up and take him with us to the rendezvous. The boat crew can dispose
of him in deep water."
Arsenov laughed. "Zina, really, you're the most pragmatic female I know."
Bourne awoke to find himself strapped into what appeared to be a dentist's chair. He
looked around the black concrete room, saw the large drain in the center of the white tile
floor, the hose coiled on the wall, the tiered cart beside the chair on which were arrayed
ranks of gleaming stainless-steel implements, all, it seemed, designed to inflict agonizing
damage to the human body, and was not reassured. He tried to move his wrists and ankles,
but the wide leather straps were secured, he noted, with the same buckles used on
straitjackets.
"You can't get out," Annaka said, coming around from behind him. "It's useless to try."
Bourne stared at her for a moment, as if he was struggling to bring her into focus. She
was dressed in white leather pants and a black sleeveless silk blouse with a plunging
neckline, an outfit she never would have worn while she was playing the role of the
innocent classical pianist and devoted daughter. He cursed himself for being gulled by
her initial antipathy toward him. He should've known better. She was too available, too
conveniently knowledgeable about Molnar's building. Hindsight was useless, however,
and he put aside his disappointment in himself and applied himself to the difficult
situation at hand.
"What an actress you turned out to be," he said.
A slow smile broadened her lips, and when she parted them slightly, he could see her
white, even teeth. "Not only with you but with Khan." She drew up the single chair in the
room and sat down close beside him. "You see, I know him well, your son. Oh, yes, I
know, Jason. I know more than you think, much more than you do." She gave a little
laugh, a tinkling, bell-like sound of pure delight as she drank in the expression on
Bourne's face. "For a long time Khan didn't know whether you were alive or dead. Indeed,
he made a number of attempts to find you, always unsuccessful—your CIA had done an
excellent job of hiding you—until Stepan helped him. But even before he knew you were,
in fact, alive, he'd spent all his idle hours concocting elaborate ways in which he'd seek
his revenge on you." She nodded. "Yes, Jason, his hatred for you was all-encompassing."
Putting her elbows on her knees, she leaned toward him. "How does that make you feel?"
"I applaud your performances." Despite the potent emotions she had dredged from him,
he was determined not to rise outwardly to her bait.
Annaka made a moue. "I'm a woman of many talents."
"And as many loyalties, it seems." He shook his head. "Did our saving each other's
lives mean nothing to you?"
She sat back up, her manner brisk now, almost businesslike. "You and I can agree on
these things, at least. Often life and death are the only things that matter."
"Then free me," he said.

"Yes, I've fallen head over heels for you, Jason." She laughed. "That's not the way
things work in real life. I saved you for one reason only: Stepan."
His brow was furrowed in concentration. "How can you let this happen?"
"How can I not? I have a history with Stepan. For a time he was the only friend my
mother had."
Bourne was surprised. "Spalko and your mother knew each other?"
Annaka nodded. Now that he was bound and presented no danger to her, she seemed to
want to talk. Bourne was rightfully suspicious of this.
"He met her after my father had her sent away," Annaka continued.
"Sent away where?" Bourne was intrigued despite himself. She could charm the venom
out of a snake.
"To a sanatorium." Annaka's eyes darkened, revealing in a flash a trace of genuine
feeling. "He had her committed. It wasn't difficult; she was physically frail, unable to
fight him. In those days ... yes, it was still possible."
"Why would he do such a thing? I don't believe you," Bourne said flatly.
"I don't care whether you believe me or not." She contemplated him for a moment with
the disturbing aspect of a reptile. Then, possibly because she needed to, she went on.
"She'd become an inconvenience. His mistress demanded it of him; in this he was
abominably weak." The outpouring of naked hatred had transformed her face into an ugly
mask, and Bourne understood that, at last, she had unleashed the truth about her past. "He
never knew that I'd discovered the truth, and I never let on. Never'' She tossed her head.
"Anyway, Stepan was visiting the same asylum. In those days, he went to see his
brother ... the brother who'd tried to kill him."
Bourne stared at her, dumbfounded. He realized that he had no idea whether she was
lying or telling the truth. He had been correct about one aspect of her, at least—she was
at war. The parts she played so masterfully were her offensives, her raiding parties into
enemy territory. He looked into her implacable eyes and knew that there was something
monstrous about the way she chose to manipulate those she had drawn close to her.
She leaned in, took his chin between her thumb and fingers. "You haven't seen Stepan,
have you? He's had extensive plastic surgery on the right side of his face and neck. What
he tells people about it varies, but the truth is, his brother threw gasoline on him and then
put a lighter to his face."
Bourne couldn't help but react. "My God. Why?"
She shrugged. "Who knows? The brother's dangerously insane. Stepan knew it, so for
that matter did his father, but he refused to acknowledge it until it was too late. And even
afterward, he continued to defend the boy, insisting that it was a tragic accident."
"All this might be true," he said. "But even if it is, it doesn't excuse you conspiring
against your own father."
She laughed. "How can you, of all people, say that, when you and Khan have tried to
kill each other? Such fury in two men, my God!"
"He came after me. I only defended myself."

"But he hates you, Jason, with a passion I've rarely seen. He hates you just as much as I
hated my father. And d'you know why? Because you abandoned him as my father
abandoned my mother."
"You're talking as if he's really my son," Bourne spat.
"Oh, yes, that's right, you've convinced yourself that he isn't. That's convenient, isn't it?
That way you don't have to think about how you left him to die in the jungle."
"But I didn't!" Bourne knew he shouldn't let her drag him into this emotionally charged
subject, but he couldn't help himself. "I was told he was dead. I had no idea he might've
survived. That's what I discovered when I was inside government database."
"Did you stay around to look, to check? No, you buried your family without even
looking in the coffins! If you had, you would've seen that your son wasn't there. No, you
coward, you fled the country instead."
Bourne tried to pull himself out of his bonds. "That's rich, you lecturing me on
family!"
"That's quite enough." Stepan Spalko had entered the room with the perfect timing of a
ringmaster. "I have more important matters to discuss with Mr. Bourne than family
sagas."
Annaka obediently stood up. She patted Bourne's cheek. "Don't look so sullen, Jason.
You're not the first man I've fooled, and you won't be the last."
"No," he said. "Spalko will be the last."
"Annaka, leave us now," Spalko said, adjusting his butcher's apron with hands covered
in Latex gloves. The apron was clean and well pressed. As yet, there wasn't a spot of
blood on it.
As Annaka departed, Bourne turned his attention to the man who, according to Khan,
had engineered the murders of Alex and Mo. "And you don't distrust her, not even a
little?"
"Yes, she's an excellent liar." He chuckled. "And I know a thing or two about lying."
He crossed to the cart, eyed with the connoisseur's intensity the implements arrayed there.
"I suppose it's natural to think that because she betrayed you, she'd do the same to me."
He turned, the light reflecting off the unnaturally smooth skin on the side of his face and
neck. "Or are you trying to drive a wedge between us? That would be standard operating
procedure for an operative of your high caliber." He shrugged and picked up an
implement, twirled it between his fingers. "Mr. Bourne, what I'm interested in is how
much you've discovered about Dr. Schiffer and his little invention."
"Where's Felix Schiffer?"
"You can't help him, Mr. Bourne, even if you could manage the impossible and free
yourself. He outlived his usefulness and now he's beyond anyone's power to resurrect."
"You killed him," Bourne said, "just as you killed Alex Conklin and Mo Panov."
Spalko shrugged. "Conklin took Dr. Schiffer away from me when I needed him the
most. I got Schiffer back, of course. I always get what I want. But Conklin had to pay for
thinking he could oppose me with impunity."
"And Panov?"

"He was in the wrong place at the wrong time," Spalko said. "It's as simple as that."
Bourne thought of all the good Mo Panov had done in his life and felt overwhelmed by
the uselessness of his death. "How can you talk about the taking of two men's lives as if it
was as simple as snapping your fingers?"
"Because it was, Mr. Bourne." Spalko laughed. "And by tomorrow the taking of those
two men's lives will be as nothing to what's coming."
Bourne tried not to look at the glinting implement. Instead, what came into his mind
was an image of László Molnar's blue-white body stuffed into his own refrigerator. He'd
seen first-hand the damage these tools of Spalko's could inflict.
Because he was face to face with the fact that Spalko had been responsible for
Molnar's torture and death, he knew that everything Khan had told him about this man
was true. And if Khan had told the truth about Spalko, was it not possible that he'd been
telling the truth all along, that he was, in fact, Joshua Webb, Bourne's own son? The facts
were mounting, the truth was before him, and Bourne felt its crushing weight as if it were
a mountain on his shoulders. He couldn't bear to look at... what?
It didn't matter now because Spalko had begun wielding his instruments of pain.
"Again, I'll ask you what you know about Dr. Schiffer's invention."
Bourne stared past Spalko. At the blank concrete wall.
"You've chosen not to answer me," Spalko said. "I applaud your courage." He smiled
charmingly. "And pity the futility of your gesture."
He applied the whorled end of the implement to Bourne's flesh.

CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX
Khan went into Houdini, a magic and logic games shop at 87 Vaci utca building. The
walls and display cabinets of the smallish boutique were crammed with magic tricks,
brain teasers and mazes of all kinds, shapes and descriptions, old and new. Children of all
ages, their mothers or fathers in tow, prowled the aisles, pointing and staring wide-eyed
at that fantastic wares.
Khan approached one of the harried salespeople and told her he wanted to see Oszkar.
She asked him his name, then picked up a phone and dialed an interior extension. She
spoke into the receiver for a moment, then directed Khan to the back of the store.
He passed through a door at the rear of the shop into a tiny vestibule lit by one bare
bulb. The walls were of an indeterminate color; the air smelled of boiled cabbage. He
went up an iron circular staircase to the office on the second floor. It was lined with
books—mostly first-edition volumes on magic, biographies and autobiographies of
famous magicians and escape artists. An autographed photo of Harry Houdini hung on
the wall over an antique oak rolltop desk. The old Persian carpet was still on the plank
floor, still in desperate need of cleaning, and the huge, thronelike high-backed armchair
still sat in its place of honor facing the desk.
Oszkar sat in exactly the same position he'd been in a year ago when Khan last had
occasion to visit him. He was a pear-shaped man of middle years with huge side whiskers

and a bulbous nose. He rose when he saw Khan and, grinning, came around from behind
the desk and shook his hand.
"Welcome back," he said, gesturing for Khan to take a seat. "What can I do for you?"
Khan told his contact what he needed. Oszkar wrote as Khan spoke, from time to time
nodding to himself.
Then he looked up. "Is that all?" He seemed disappointed; he loved nothing better than
being challenged.
"Not quite," Khan said. "There's the matter of a magnetic lock."
"Now we're talking!" Oszkar was beaming now. He rubbed his hands together as he
rose. "Come with me, my friend."
He led Khan into a wallpapered hallway lit by what appeared to be gaslamps. He had a
way of waddling when he walked, comical as a penguin, but when you saw him escape
from three pairs of handcuffs in under ninety seconds, you were exposed to a whole new
meaning of the word finesse.
He opened a door and walked into his workshop—a large space evenly divided into
areas by workbenches and metal counters. He directed Khan over to one, where he
commenced to rummage through a vertical stack of drawers. At length he brought out a
small black and chrome square.
"All mag locks work off current, you know that, right?" When Khan nodded, he
continued. "And they're all fail-safe, meaning they need a constant power supply to work.
Anyone who installs one of these knows that if you cut the current, the lock will open, so
there's certain to be a backup power supply, possibly even two, if the subject's paranoid
enough."
"This one is," Khan assured him.
"Very well then." Oszkar nodded. "So forget about cutting the power supply—it'll take
you too long, and even if you had the time you still might not be able to cut the power to
all the backups." He held up a forefinger. "But, what's not so commonly known is that all
magnetic locks work off DC current, so ..." He rummaged around again, held up another
object. "What you need is a portable AC power supply with enough juice to zap the mag
lock."
Khan took the power pack in his hand. It was heavier than it looked. "How is it going
to work?"
"Imagine a lightning strike on an electrical system." Oszkar tapped the power supply.
"This baby will scramble the DC current long enough for you to open the door, but it
won't short it out completely. Eventually, it'll cycle back on again and the lock will
reestablish itself."
"How long will I have?" Khan asked.
"That depends on the make and model of the mag lock." Oszkar shrugged his meaty
shoulders. "The best guess I can give you is fifteen minutes, maybe twenty, but no more
than that."
"Can't I just zap it again?"

Oszkar shook his head. "Chances are good you'll freeze the mag into its locked
position, and then you'd have to take the entire door down in order to get out." He
laughed, clapped Khan on the back. "Not to worry, I have faith in you."
Khan looked at him askance. "Since when did you have faith in anything?" "Quite
right." Oszkar handed him a small zippered leather case. "Tricks of the trade always
trump faith."
At precisely two-fifteen in the morning, local Icelandic time, Arsenov and Zina placed
the carefully wrapped body of Magomet into one of the vans and drove down the coast
farther south toward an out-of-the-way cove. Arsenov was behind the wheel. Periodically,
Zina, studying a detailed map, gave him directions.
"I sense the nervousness in the others," he said after a time. "It's more than simple
anticipation."
"We're on more than a simple mission, Hasan."
He glanced at her. "Sometimes I wonder whether icewater runs in your veins."
She put a smile on her face as she briefly squeezed his leg. "You know very well what
runs in my veins."
He nodded. "That I do." He had to admit that, as much as he was driven by his desire
to lead his people, he was happiest being with Zina. He longed for a time when the war
would be over, when he could shed his rebel's guise and be a husband to her, a father to
their children.
"Zina," he said as they turned off the road and jounced down the rutted path that
descended off the cliff face to their destination, "we've never talked about us."
"What d'you mean?" Of course she knew very well what he meant and tried to push
away the sudden dread that constricted her. "Of course we have."
The way had become steeper and he slowed the van. Zina could see the last turn in the
path; beyond that was the rocky cove and the restless North Atlantic.
"Not about our future, our marriage, the children we'll have one day. What better time
to pledge our love for each other."
It was then that she fully understood how intuitive the Shaykh really was. For by his
own words, Hasan Arsenov had condemned himself. He was afraid to die. She heard it in
his choice of words, if not in his voice or in his eyes.
She saw his doubts, now, about her. If there was one thing she'd learned since joining
the rebels, it was that doubt undermined initiative, determination, most especially action.
Because of the extreme tension and anxiety, perhaps, he had exposed himself, and his
weakness was as repugnant to her as it had been to the Shaykh. Hasan's doubts about her
were sure to infect his thinking. She'd made a terrible blunder in seeking so quickly to
enlist Magomet, but she was so very eager to embrace the Shaykh's future. Still, judging
by Hasan's violent reaction, his doubts about her must have begun earlier. Did he think
that he could no longer trust her?
They had arrived at the rendezvous point fifteen minutes ahead of schedule. She turned
and took his face in her hands. Tenderly, she said, "Hasan, long have we walked side by
side in the shadow of death. We have survived through the will of Allah, but also because

of our unswerving devotion to one another." She leaned over and kissed him. "So now we
pledge ourselves to one another, because we desire death in the path of Allah more than
our enemies desire life."
Arsenov closed his eyes for a moment. This was what he'd wanted from her, what he'd
been afraid she'd never give him. It was why, he realized now, he'd jumped to an ugly
conclusion when he'd seen her with Magomet.
"In Allah's eyes, under Allah's hand, in Allah's heart," he said in a form of benediction.
They embraced, but Zina was, of course, far away across the North Atlantic. She was
wondering what the Shaykh was doing at this very moment. She longed to see his face, to
be near him. Soon, she told herself. Soon enough everything she wanted would be hers.
Sometime later they got out of the van and stood watching on the shore, hearing the
waves rumble and spend themselves against the shingle. The moon had already gone
down in the short span of darkness this far north. In another half hour it would grow light
and another long day would dawn. They were in more or less the center of the cove, its
arms extended on either side so that the tide was stymied, the waves made small and
robbed of their usual peril. A chill wind off the black water made Zina shiver, but
Arsenov embraced it.
They saw the sweep of the light then, blinking on and off three times. The boat had
arrived. Arsenov switched on the flashlight, returning the signal. Faintly, they could see
the fishing boat running no lights, nosing in. They went to the back of the van and,
together, brought their burden down to the tide line.
"Won't they be surprised to see you again," Arsenov said.
"They're the Shaykh's men, nothing surprises them," Zina replied, acutely aware that
according to the story the Shaykh told Hasan she was supposed to have met this crew. Of
course, the Shaykh would have already apprised them of that fact.
Arsenov switched on his flashlight again and they saw heading toward them an oared
boat, heavily laden, lying low in the water. There were two men and a stack of crates;
there would be more crates on the fishing boat. Arsenov glanced at his watch; he hoped
they could finish before first light.
The two men nosed the prow of the rowboat up onto the shingle and got out. They
didn't waste time with introductions, but as they had been ordered to do, they treated Zina
as if she was known to them.
With great efficiency, the four of them offloaded the crates, piling them up neatly in
the back of the van. Arsenov heard a sound, turned and saw that a second rowboat had
pulled up onto the shingle and knew then that they'd beat the dawn.
They loaded Magomet's corpse onto the first rowboat, now otherwise empty, and Zina
gave the crew members the order to dump it when they were in the deepest water. They
obeyed her without question, which pleased Arsenov. Obviously, she'd made an
impression on them when she'd supervised the delivery of the cargo to them.
In short order, then, the six of them moved the rest of the crates into the van. Then the
men returned to their boats as silently as they had disembarked from them and, with a
push from Arsenov and Zina, began their return journey to the fishing boat.

Arsenov and Zina looked at each other. With the arrival of the cargo, the mission had
suddenly taken on a reality it hadn't had before.
"Can you feel it, Zina?" Arsenov said as he put his hand on one of the crates. "Can you
feel the death waiting there?"
She put her hand over his. "What I feel is victory."
They drove back to the base where they were met by the other members of the cadre,
who through the judicious application of peroxide dye and colored contact lenses had
now been utterly transformed. Nothing was said concerning the death of Magomet. He
had come to a bad end and this close to their mission none of them wanted to know the
details—they had more important things on their minds.
Carefully, the crates were unloaded and opened, revealing compact machine pistols,
packs of C4 plastique explosive, HAZMAT suits. Another crate, smaller than the others,
contained scallions, bagged, bedded in shaved ice. Arsenov gestured to Akhmed, who
donned Latex gloves and removed the crate of scallions to the van that had printed on it
Hafnarfjordur Fine Fruits & Vegetables. Then the blond and blue-eyed Akhmed climbed
into the van and drove off.
The last crate was left for Arsenov and Zina to open. It contained the NX 20. Together,
they looked at it, the two halves lying innocently inside their molded foam bed, and
thought of what they'd been witness to in Nairobi. Arsenov looked at his watch. "Very
soon now the Shaykh will arrive with the payload."
The final preparations had begun.
Just after nine a.m., a van from Fontana Department Store pulled up at the service
entrance on the basement level of Humanistas, Ltd. where it was halted by a pair of
security guards. One of them consulted his daily work sheet and even though he saw on it
a delivery from Fontana for Ethan Hearn's office, he asked to see the bill of lading. When
the driver complied, the guard told him to open the back of the van. The guard climbed in,
checked off each item on the list, then he and his partner opened every carton, checking
the two chairs, credenza, cabinet and sofa bed. All the doors on the credenza and cabinet
were opened, the interiors inspected, the pillows on the sofa and chairs lifted. Finding
everything in order, the security guards handed back the bill of lading and gave the driver
and his delivery partner directions to Ethan Hearn's office.
The driver parked near the elevator and he and his partner unloaded the furniture. It
took them four trips to get everything up to the sixth floor, where Hearn was waiting for
them. He was only too pleased to show them where he wanted each piece of furniture,
and they were just as pleased to receive the generous gratuity he handed them when their
task was completed.
After they left, Hearn closed the door and began to transfer the stacks of files that had
built up beside his desk into the cabinet in alphabetical order. The hush of a well-run
office fell over the room. After a time, Hearn rose and went to the door. Opening it, he
found himself face to face with the woman who had accompanied the man on the
stretcher into the building late yesterday.
"You're Ethan Hearn?" When he nodded, she held out a hand. "Annaka Vadas."

He took her hand briefly, noting that it was firm and dry. He recalled Khan's warning
and he put an innocently quizzical look on his face. "Do we know each other?"
"I'm a friend of Stepan's." Her smile was dazzling. "Do you mind if I come in, or were
you just leaving?"
"I do have an appointment in"—he glanced at his watch—"a little while."
"I won't take up much of your time." She walked to the sofa bed and sat, crossing her
legs. Her expression, as she stared up at Hearn, was alert and expectant.
He sat in his chair and swiveled it around to face her. "How may I help you, Ms.
Vadas?"
"I think you've got it wrong," she said brightly. "The question is how may I help you?"
He shook his head. "I don't think I understand."
She looked around the office, humming to herself. Then she leaned forward, her
elbows on her knee. "Oh, but I think you do, Ethan." That smile again. "You see, I know
something about you even Stepan doesn't."
He stitched that quizzical look back onto his face, spread his hands in a gesture of
helplessness.
"You're trying too hard," she said shortly. "I know you're working for someone else as
well as for Stepan."
"I don't—"
But she'd put a forefinger across his lips. "I saw you yesterday in the garage. You
couldn't have been there for your health, and even if you were, you were far too interested
in the proceedings."
He was too stunned even to formulate a denial. And what was the point? he asked
himself. She'd made him, even though he thought he'd been so very careful. He stared at
her. She was, indeed, beautiful, but she was even more formidable.
She cocked her head. "It isn't Interpol you work for—you don't have their habits. CIA,
no, I don't think so. Stepan would know if the Americans were trying to penetrate his
organization. So who then, hmm?"
Hearn wouldn't say; he couldn't. He was only terrified that she already knew—that she
knew everything.
"Don't look so ashen, Ethan." Annaka rose. "I don't care, really. I simply want an
insurance policy in case things turn sour here. That insurance policy is you. For now, let's
just call your treachery our little secret."
She had crossed the room and gone out the door before Hearn could think of a reply.
He sat for a moment, immobile with shock. Then, at last he got up and opened the door,
looking this way and that up and down the corridor to make certain she was really gone.
Then he closed the door, walked over to the sofa bed and said, "All clear."
The cushions lifted up and he put them on the wall-to-wall carpet. When the plywood
panels that covered the bed mechanism began to stir, he reached down and lifted them out.
Underneath, instead of the mattress and bed frame, lay Khan.
Hearn realized that he was sweating. "I know you warned me, but—"

"Quiet." Khan climbed out of the space that was no larger than a coffin. Hearn cowered,
but Khan had more important things on his mind than corporal punishment. "Just make
sure you don't make the same mistake twice."
Khan walked to the door, put his ear against it. All that could be discerned was the
background hum of the offices on the floor. He was dressed in black trousers, shoes, shirt
and waist-length jacket. To Hearn, he looked a good deal bulkier in the upper body than
he had the last time they'd met.
"Put the sofa bed back together," Khan ordered, "then return to work as if nothing had
happened. You have a meeting soon? Make sure you go to it and that you're not late. It's
imperative that everything appear normal."
Hearn nodded, dropping the plywood panels into the well of the sofa bed, then
replacing the cushions. "We're on the sixth floor," he said. "Your target's on the fourth
floor."
"Let's see the schematics."
Hearn sat down at his computer terminal and brought up the schematics for the
building.
"Let me see the fourth floor," Khan said, bending over his shoulder.
When Hearn brought it up, Khan studied it carefully. "What's this?" he asked, pointing.
"I don't know." Hearn tried zooming in. "It looks like blank space."
"Or," Khan said, "it could be a room adjacent to Spalko's bedroom suite."
"Except there isn't a way in or out," Hearn pointed out.
"Interesting. I wonder if Mr. Spalko made some alterations his architects knew nothing
about."
Having memorized the floor plan, Khan turned away. He'd gotten all he could from the
schematic; now he needed to see the place for himself. At the door he turned back to
Hearn. "Remember. Get to your appointment on time."
"What about you?" Heard said. "You can't get in there."
Khan shook his head. "The less you know, the better."
The flags were out in the endless Icelandic morning, filled with brilliant sunshine and
the mineral scent of the thermal springs. The elaborate aluminum scaffold of a large dais
had been set up and wired for sound at one end of Ke-flavik Airport, which Jamie Hull,
Boris Illyich Karpov and Feyd al-Saoud had determined was the most secure space on the
grounds. None of them, even Comrade Boris, it seemed, was happy about their respective
leaders appearing in such a public forum, but in this all the heads of state were of a like
mind. It was imperative, they felt, not only to show their solidarity in a public manner but
also to show their lack of fear. They all knew the risk of assassination when they took
their positions, were acutely aware of how that risk had escalated exponentially when
they had agreed to the summit. But they all knew the risk of death was a component of
their work. If you set out to change the world, inevitably there would be those who would
stand in your way.
And so on this morning of the start of the summit, the flags of the United States,
Russia and the four most influential Islamic nations rippled and cracked in the biting

wind, the front of the dais had been draped with the carefully fought-over logo of the
summit, armored security was in place around the perimeter, snipers placed high up at
every possible strategic sight line. The press had come from every nation in the world;
they had been required to show up two hours in advance of the press conference.
Journalists had been methodically screened, their credentials checked, their fingerprints
taken and scanned through various databases. Photographers had been warned not to load
their cameras ahead of time because they needed to be X-rayed on site, each film cannister examined, every one of the photographers themselves observed while they loaded
their cameras. As for cell phones, they were confiscated, meticulously tagged and kept
outside the perimeter, to be retrieved at the end of the press conference by their respective
owners. No detail had been overlooked.
As the president of the United States made his appearance, Jamie Hull was at his side,
along with a brace of Secret Service agents. Hull was in constant contact with every
member of his contingent as well as the other two heads of security via an electronic
earbud. Just behind the U.S. president came Aleksandr Yevtushenko, president of Russia,
accompanied by Boris and a cadre of grim-faced FSB agents. Behind him were the
leaders of the four Islamic states, with the respective heads of their security services.
The crowd as well as the press surged forward only to be kept back from the front of
the dais the dignitaries had now mounted. The microphones were tested, the television
cameras went live. The U.S. president took the microphone first. He was a tall, handsome
man with a prominent nose and the eyes of a watchdog.
"My fellow citizens of the world," he began in the strong, declarative voice honed at
many a successful primary race, smoothed of any remaining rough edges by numerous
press conferences and richly burnished by intimate speeches in the Rose Garden and at
Camp David, "this is a great day for world peace and for the international fight for justice
and freedom against the forces of violence and terrorism.
"Today, we once again stand at a crossroads in the history of the world. Will we allow
all of humankind to be plunged into the darkness of fear and neverending war or will we
band together to strike at the heart of our enemies wherever they may hide?
"The forces of terrorism are arrayed against us. And make no mistake, terrorism is a
modern-day hydra, a beast of many heads. We have no illusions about the difficult road
ahead of us, but we will not be deterred in our desire to move forward in a single
concerted effort. Only united can we destroy the many-headed beast. Only united do we
stand a chance of making our world a safe place for each and every citizen."
At the end of the president's speech there was great applause. Then he yielded the
microphone to the Russian president, who said more or less the same things, also to great
applause. The four Arab leaders spoke one by one, and though their words were more
circumspect, they too reiterated the burning need for a united effort at stamping out
terrorism once and for all.
A short question and answer period ensued, after which the six men stood side by side
for their photo op. It was an impressive sight, made even more memorable when they
grasped one another's hands and raised their arms aloft in an unprecedented display of
solidarity between the West and the East.
As the crowd slowly filed out, the mood was jubilant. And even the most jaded
journalists and photographers agreed that the summit had gotten off to a sterling start.

"Do you realize that I'm on my third pair of Latex gloves?"
Stepan Spalko was at the scarred and blood-stained table, sitting on the chair Annaka
had used the day before. In front of him was a bacon, lettuce and tomato sandwich, for
which he'd developed a taste during his long convalescence between operations in the
United States. The sandwich was on a plate of fine bone china, and at his right hand was
a stemmed glass of finest crystal filled with a vintage Bordeaux.
"No matter. The hour grows late." He tapped the crystal of the chronometer on his
wrist. "It occurs to me now, Mr. Bourne, that my marvelous entertainment is at an end. I
must tell you what a wonderful night you've provided me." He barked a laugh. "Which is
more than I did for you, I daresay."
His sandwich had been cut into two equal triangles, exactly to his specifications. He
picked one up and bit into it, chewed slowly and luxuriously. "You know, Mr. Bourne, a
bacon, lettuce and tomato sandwich is no good unless the bacon had been freshly cooked
and, if possible, thickly sliced."
He swallowed, put down the sandwich and, grasping the crystal glass, swirled a
measure of Bordeaux around in his mouth. Then he pushed back his chair, rose and went
over to where Jason Bourne sat strapped into the dentist's chair. His head was lolled on
his chest and there were blood spatters in a two-foot radius around him.
Spalko used a knuckle to lift Bourne's head. His eyes, dulled with endless pain, were
sunken into dark circles and his face appeared drained of blood. "Before I go, I must tell
you the irony of it all. The hour of my triumph is upon us. It doesn't matter what you
know. It doesn't matter whether you talked or not now. All that matters is that I have you
here, safe and unable to act against me in any way." He laughed. "What a terrible price
you've paid for your silence. And for what, Mr. Bourne? Nothing!"
Khan saw the guard standing in the corridor beside the elevator and went cautiously
back down toward the door to the staircase. Through the wire-mesh reinforced glass
panel he could see a pair of armed guards talking and smoking in the stairwell. Every
fifteen seconds one or the other would glance out through the glass panel, checking the
sixth-floor corridor. The stairs were too well defended.
He reversed himself. Striding down the corridor at a normal and relaxed pace, he drew
the air gun he purchased from Oszkar and held it at his side. The instant the guard saw
him, Khan raised the air gun, shot a dart into his neck. The man collapsed where he stood,
rendered unconscious by the chemical in the dart's tip.
Khan broke into a run. He began to drag the guard into the men's room when the door
opened and a second guard appeared, his machine pistol aimed at Khan's chest.
"Hold it right there," he said. "Throw down your weapon and let me see your empty
hands."
Khan did as he was ordered. As he held out his hands for the guard to inspect, he
touched a hidden spring-loaded sheath attached to the inner side of his wrist. The guard
clapped one hand to his throat. The dart felt like an insect bite. But all at once he found
that he couldn't see. That was the last thought he had before he, too, sank into
unconsciousness.

Khan dragged both bodies into the men's room, then hit the call button on the wall
panel. A moment later the two sets of doors opened as the elevator cab arrived. He got in
and pressed the button for the fourth floor. The elevator began to descend, but as it passed
the fifth floor, it jolted to a halt, hanging suspended. He pressed several floor buttons to
no avail. The elevator was stuck, no doubt deliberately so. He knew he had very little
time to escape from the trap Spalko had set for him.
Climbing up onto the handrail that ran around the cab, he stretched upward toward the
maintenance hatch. He was about to open it when he stopped and peered more closely.
What was that metallic glint? He took out the mini-light from the kit Oszkar had given
him, shone it on the screw in the farthest corner. There was a bit of copper wire wrapped
around it. It was booby-trapped! Khan knew that the moment he tried to take off the
hatch it would detonate a charge placed on top of the cab.
At that moment, a lurch dislodged him from his perch and the elevator cab, shuddering,
began to plummet down the shaft.
Spalko's phone rang and he stepped out of the interrogation room. Sunlight spilled
through the windows of his bedroom as he walked into it, feeling the warmth on his face.
"Yes?"
A voice spoke in his ear, the words accelerating his pulse. He was here! Khan was here!
His hand clenched into a fist. He had them both now. His work here was almost done. He
ordered his men onto the third floor, then called the main security desk and ordered them
to begin a fire drill that would in short order evacuate all normal Humanistas personnel
from the building. Within twenty seconds, the fire alarm shrilled and all through the
building, men and women left their offices and proceeded in an orderly fashion to the
stairwells, where they were escorted out onto the street. By this time Spalko had called
his driver and his pilot, telling the latter to ready the jet that had been waiting for him in
the Humanistas hangar at Ferihegy Airport. Per his instructions, it had already been
fueled and inspected, a flight plan logged in with the tower.
There was one more call he needed to make before he returned to Jason Bourne.
"Khan's in the building," he said when Annaka answered the phone. "He's trapped in
the elevator and I've sent men to deal with him if he manages to escape, but you know
him better than anyone." He grunted at her response. "What you're saying isn't a surprise.
Deal with it as you see fit."
Khan hit the Emergency Stop button with the heel of his hand, but nothing happened,
the elevator continued its precipitous descent. With one of the tools from Oszkar's kit, he
quickly pried open the display panel. Inside was a nest of wires, but he immediately saw
that the wires to the emergency break had been disconnected. Deftly, he fitted them back
into their receptacles, and at once with a squeal of sparking metal the elevator cab lurched
to a halt as the emergency brake kicked in. As the cab hung, stalled, between the third
and fourth floors, Khan continued to work on the wiring with a breathless intensity.
On the third floor Spalko's armed men reached the outer elevator doors. Employing a
fire key, they manually pried open the doors, exposing the shaft. Just above them, they
could see the bottom of the stalled elevator cab. They had their orders; they knew what to

do. Aiming their machine pistols, they opened fire in a massed fusillade that chewed up
the bottom third of the elevator cab. No one could survive such massed firepower.
Khan, spreadeagled, hands and feet pressed hard against the walls of the elevator
shaft's setback, watched the lower part of the cab fall away. He was protected from the
ricochet of bullets both by the doors of the cab and by the shaft itself. He'd rewired the
panel to allow him to open the cab doors just enough to squeeze out. He'd been squirming
into position in the setback, climbing to approximately the height of the cab's top when
the hail of automatic fire began.
Now, in the echoing aftermath of the percussion, he heard a buzzing as of a swarm of
bees loosed from their hive. Looking up, he saw a pair of rap-peling lines snaking down
from the top of the shaft. Moments later two heavily armed guards in riot gear came
down the lines, hand over hand.
One of them saw him and swung his machine pistol toward him. Khan fired his air gun,
and the guard's weapon dropped from his numbed fingers. As the second guard aimed his
weapon, Khan leaped out, grabbed hold of the unconscious man, who by dint of his
rappeling harness was held fast to the line. The second guard, faceless and anonymous in
his riot helmet, fired at Khan, who swung his line companion around, using his body as a
shield to stop the bullets. He kicked out, snapping the machine pistol out of the second
guard's grasp.
They both landed atop the elevator cab together. The small pale square of deadly C4
explosive was taped to the center of the maintenance hatch where it had been hastily
wired to set the booby trap. Khan could see that the screws had been loosened; if either of
them inadvertently struck the hatch plate, dislodging it even a little, the entire cab would
be blown to pieces.
Khan squeezed the trigger on his air gun, but the guard, who had seen how he'd
incapacitated his partner, dived out of the way, rolled and kicked upward, knocking the
weapon out of Khan's grasp. At the same time he grabbed his partner's machine pistol.
Khan trod down hard on his hand, grinding with his heel in an attempt to dislodge the
weapon from the guard's grip. But now there were bursts of automatic fire from the
guards on the third floor, who were firing up the shaft.
The guard, taking advantage of the distraction, smashed Khan's leg sideways and
wrested the machine pistol from him. As he fired, Khan leaped off the cab, sliding down
the side of the shaft to the place where the emergency brake was extended. Moving back
from the hail of gunfire, he worked on the brake mechanism. The guard on the roof of the
cab had followed his progress and was now stretched out on his belly, aiming the
machine pistol at Khan. As he began firing, Khan was able to release the emergency
brake mechanism. The elevator cab plunged down the shaft, taking the shocked guard
with it.
Khan leaped for the nearest rappeling rope and clambered up it. He reached the fourth
floor and was applying the AC current to the magnetic lock when the elevator cab
impacted with the bottom of the shaft in the sub-basement. The shock dislodged the
maintenance hatch and the C4 detonated. The explosion shot up the shaft just as the mag
lock circuit was disrupted and Khan tumbled through the door.

The fourth-floor vestibule was clad entirely in cafe-au-lait marble. Frosted-glass
sconces provided soft indirect lighting. As Khan picked himself up, he saw Annaka not
five yards from him, fleeing down the hall. Clearly, she was surprised and, quite possibly,
he thought, not a little frightened. Obviously, neither she nor Spalko had counted on him
making it to the fourth floor. He laughed silently as he set off in pursuit. He couldn't
blame them; it was quite a feat he'd performed.
Up ahead, Annaka went through a door. As she slammed it shut behind her, Khan
heard the lock click into place. He knew he needed to get to Bourne and Spalko, but
Annaka had become a wild card he couldn't afford to ignore. He had a set of picks out
even as he reached the locked door. Inserting one, he finessed out the grooves of the
tumbler. It took him less than fifteen seconds to open the door, hardly time enough for
Annaka to have made it to the other side of the room. She threw him a frightened glance
over her shoulder before she slammed the door shut behind her.
In retrospect, he should have been warned by her expression. Annaka never showed
fear. He was, however, alerted by the ominous room, which was small and square, as
featureless as it was windowless. It appeared unfinished, freshly painted a dead white,
even the wide, carved moldings. There was no furniture, nothing at all in the space. But
his alarm arrived too late, for the soft hiss had already begun. Peering up, he saw the
vents high in the walls, from which a gas was being discharged. Holding his breath, he
went to the far door. He picked the lock, but still the door wouldn't open. It must be
bolted from the outside, he thought, as he ran back to the door through which he'd entered
the room. He turned the knob only to find that it, too, had been bolted from the outside.
The gas was starting to permeate the barred room. He was neatly trapped.
Next to the crumb-spattered bone china plate and the stemmed glass in which remained
the dregs of the Bordeaux, Stepan Spalko had arrayed the items he had taken from
Bourne: the ceramic gun, Conklin's cell phone, the wad of money and the switchblade
knife.
Bourne, battered and bloody, had been deep in delta meditation for hours now, first to
survive the waves of agony that had rippled through his body at every new twist and jab
of Spalko's implements, then to protect and conserve his inner core of energy, and finally
to throw off the debilitating effects of the torture and to build up his strength.
Thoughts of Marie, Alison and Jamie flickered through his emptied mind like fitful
flames, but what had come to him most vividly was his years in sun-drenched Phnom
Penh. His mind, calmed to the point of complete tranquility, resurrected Dao, Alyssa and
Joshua. He was tossing a baseball to Joshua, showing him how to use the glove he'd
brought from the States, when Joshua turned to him and said, "Why did you try to
replicate us? Why didn't you save us?" He became confused for a moment, until he saw
Khan's face hanging in his mind like a full moon in a starless sky. Khan opened his
mouth and said, "You tried to replicate Joshua and Alyssa. You even used the same first
letters in their names."
He wanted to rise out of his enforced meditation, to abandon the fortress he'd erected
to protect himself against the worst of the ravages Spalko was visiting upon him,
anything to get away from the accusatory face, the crushing guilt.
Guilt.

It was his own guilt that he'd been running away from. Ever since Khan had told him
who he really was, he'd run from the truth, just as he'd run from Phnom Penh as fast as he
could. He thought he'd been running away from the tragedy that had befallen him, but the
truth was he'd run from the burden of his unsupportable guilt. He hadn't been there to
protect his family when they'd needed him the most. Slamming the door on the truth, he'd
fled.
God help him, in this he was, as Annaka had said, a coward.
As Bourne's watched out of bloodshot eyes, Spalko pocketed the money and took up
the gun. "I've used you to keep the hounds of the world's intelligence organizations off
my trail. In this you've served me well." He leveled the gun at Bourne, aiming for a spot
just above and between his eyes. "But, sadly, your use to me is at an end." His finger
tightened on the trigger.
At that moment Annaka came into the room. "Khan made it onto the floor," she said.
Despite himself, Spalko registered surprise. "I heard the explosion. He wasn't killed by
it?"
"He somehow managed to crash the elevator. It exploded in the sub-basement."
"Luckily, the latest delivery of weapons was shipped out." At last he turned his gaze on
her. "Where's Khan now?"
"He's trapped in the locked room. It's time to leave."
Spalko nodded. She'd been dead on when it came to Khan's skills. He'd been right to
encourage the liaison between them. Duplicitous creature that she was, she's gotten to
know Khan better than he himself could've hoped to. Still, he stared at Bourne, certain his
business with him was not yet finished.
"Stepan." Annaka put a hand on his arm. "The plane is waiting. We need time to leave
the building unseen. The fire-circuits have been activated and all the oxygen has been
pumped out of the elevator shaft so there's no chance of major damage. Still, there must
be flames in the lobby and the fire wagons will be here if they're not already."
She'd thought of everything. Spalko looked at her admiringly. Then, without any
warning, he swept the hand that held Bourne's ceramic gun in an arc, slamming the barrel
into the side of Bourne's head.
"I'll just take this as a souvenir of our first and last encounter."
Then he and Annaka left the room.
Khan, down on his belly, dug furiously, using a small crowbar from the tools he'd
requested from Oszkar, at a section of the molding. His eyes burned and teared from the
gas, and his lungs were near to bursting from lack of oxygen. He had only a few more
seconds left before he passed out and his autonomous nervous system took over, allowing
the gas into his system.
But now he'd pried off a section of the molding and immediately he could feel the draft
of cool air coming from outside the room he was in. He stuck his nose into the vent he'd
made, breathed in the fresh air. Then, taking a deep breath, he quickly set up the small
charge of C4 Oszkar had provided. This, above all the items on his list, had told Oszkar

the extent of the danger he was heading into, prompting the contact to give Khan the
escape kit as added protection.
Putting his nose into the vent, Khan took another deep breath, then he replaced it with
the packet of C4, wedging it as far in as he was able. Scrambling to the opposite side of
the room, he pressed the remote.
The resulting explosion brought down a section of the wall as it blew a hole right
through it. Without waiting for the plastic and wood dust to settle, Khan leaped though
the wall into Stepan Spalko's bedroom.
Sunlight slanted through the windows, and the Danube glittered below. Khan threw
open all the windows in order to dissipate whatever leakage of gas found its way in. At
once he could hear sirens, and glancing down, he saw the fire trucks and the police cars,
the frenzied activity on street level. He stepped back from the windows, looked around,
orienting himself to the architectural plans Hearn had brought up on his computer screen.
He turned to where the blank space had been, saw the gleaming wooden wall panels.
Pressing his ear to each panel in turn, he rapped with his knuckles. In this way the third
panel from the left revealed itself as a door. He pressed against the left side of the panel
and it swung inward.
Khan stepped into the room of black concrete and white tiles. It stank of sweat and
blood. He found himself facing a bloody, battered Jason Bourne. He stared at Bourne,
strapped into the dentist's chair, blood spatters in a circle around him. Bourne was bare to
the waist. His arms, shoulders, chest and back were a welter of puffy wounds and
blistered flesh. The two outer layers that wrapped his ribs had been stripped away, but the
underlayer was still intact.
Bourne's head swung around and regarded Khan with the look of a wounded bull,
bloody but unbowed.
"I heard the second explosion," Bourne said, in a reedy voice. "I thought you had been
killed."
"Disappointed?" Khan bared his teeth. "Where is he? Where's Spalko?"
"I'm afraid you're too late on that score," Bourne said. "He's gone, and Annaka Vadas
with him."
"She was working for him all along," Khan said. "I tried to warn you at the clinic, but
you didn't want to listen."
Bourne sighed, closed his eyes against the sharp rebuke. "I didn't have time."
"You never seem to have time to listen."
Khan approached Bourne. His throat seemed constricted. He knew that he should go
after Spalko, but something rooted him to the spot. He stared at the damage Spalko had
wrought.
Bourne said, "Will you kill me now." It was not a question, more a statement of fact.
Khan knew that he would never have a better chance. The dark thing inside him that he
had nurtured, that had become his only companion, which daily feasted on his hate, and
which daily had spewed its poison back out into his system, refused to die. It wanted to
kill Bourne, and it almost took possession of him then. Almost. He felt the impulse

coming up from his lower belly into his arm, but it had bypassed his heart and so fell
short of impelling him to action.
Abruptly, he turned on his heel and went back into Spalko's luxe bedroom. In a
moment he'd returned with a glass of water and a handful of items he'd scavenged from
the bathroom. He held the glass to Bourne's mouth, tipping it slowly until it had been
drained. As if of their own volition, his hands unstrapped the buckles, freeing Bourne's
wrists and ankles.
Bourne's eyes watched him as he went about cleaning and disinfecting the wounds.
Bourne didn't lift his hands from the arms of the chair. In a sense, he felt more completely
paralyzed now than he had while restrained. He stared hard at Khan, scrutinizing every
curve and angle, every feature of his face. Did he see Dao's mouth, his own nose? Or was
it all an illusion? If this was his son, he needed to know; he needed to understand what
had happened. But he still felt an undercurrent of uncertainty, a ripple of fear. The
possibility that he was confronting his own son after so many years of believing him dead
was too much for him. On the other hand, the silence into which they had now been
plunged was intolerable. And so he fell back to the one neutral topic he knew was of
extreme interest to both of them. "You wanted to know what Spalko was up to," he said,
breathing slowly and deeply as each shock of the disinfectant sent bolts of pain through
him. "He's stolen a weapon invented by Felix Schiffer—a portable bio-diffuser.
Somehow Spalko has coerced Peter Sido—an epidemiologist working at the clinic—to
provide him with the payload."
Khan dropped the blood-soaked piece of gauze, picked up a clean one. "Which is?"
"Anthrax, a designer hemorrhagic fever, I don't know. The only thing for certain is that
it's quite lethal."
Khan continued to clean Bourne's wounds. The floor was now littered with bloody bits
of gauze. "Why are you telling me this now?" he said with undisguised suspicion.
"Because I know what Spalko means to do with this weapon."
Khan looked up from his work.
Bourne found it physically painful to look into Khan's eyes. Taking a deep breath, he
plowed on. "Spalko's on a very tight time constraint. He needed to get moving now."
"The terrorism summit in Reykjavik."
Bourne nodded. "It's the only possibility that makes sense."
Khan stood up, rinsing off his hands at the hose. He watched the pink water swirl
through the huge grate. "That is, if I believe you."
"I'm going after them," Bourne said. "After putting the pieces together, I finally
realized that Conklin had taken Schiffer and hidden him with Vadas and Molnar because
he'd learned of Spalko's threat. I got the code name for the bio-diffuser—NX 20—from a
pad in Conklin's house."
"And so Conklin was murdered for it." Khan nodded. "Why didn't he go to the Agency
with his information? Surely, the CIA as a whole would've been better equipped to
handle the threat to Dr. Schiffer."
"There could be many reasons," Bourne said. "He didn't think he'd be believed, given
Spalko's reputation as a humanitarian. He didn't have enough time; his intel wasn't

concrete enough for the Agency's bureaucracy to move on it quickly enough. Also, it
wasn't Alex's way. He hated sharing secrets."
Bourne rose slowly and painfully, one hand supporting himself on the back of the chair.
His legs felt like rubber from having been in one position for so long. "Spalko killed
Schiffer, and I have to assume that he has Dr. Sido, alive or dead. I've got to stop him
from killing everyone at the summit."
Khan turned and handed Bourne the cell phone. "Here. Call the Agency."
"Do you think they'd believe me? As far as the Agency's concerned, I murdered
Conklin and Panov in the house in Manassas."
"I'll do it then. Even the bureaucracy of the CIA has to take seriously an anonymous
call that threatens the life of the president of the United States."
Bourne shook his head. "The head of American security is a man named Jamie Hull.
He'd be sure to find a way to screw up the intel." His eyes gleamed. They'd already lost
most of their dullness. "That leaves only one other option, but I don't think I can do it
alone."
"Judging by the look of you," Khan said, "you can't do it at all."
Bourne forced himself to look Khan in the eye. "All the more reason, then, for you to
join me."
"You're insane!"
Bourne inured himself to the rising hostility. "You want Spalko as badly as I do.
Where's the downside?"
"All I see is downside." Khan sneered. "Look at you! You're a mess."
Bourne had detached himself from the chair and was walking around the room,
stretching his muscles, gaining strength and confidence in his body with every stride he
took. Khan saw this and was, frankly, astonished.
Bourne turned to him and said, "I promise not to make you do all the heavy lifting."
Khan didn't reject the offer out of hand. Instead, he made a grudging concession, not at
all certain why he was doing it. "The first thing we have to do is get out of here safely."
"I know," Bourne said, "you managed to start a fire and now the building is swarming
with firemen and, no doubt, the police."
"I wouldn't be here if I hadn't started that fire."
Bourne could see that his light bantering wasn't easing the tension. If anything, it was
doing the opposite. They didn't know how to talk to each other. He wondered whether
they ever would. "Thank you for rescuing me," he said.
Khan wouldn't meet his eye. "Don't flatter yourself. I came here to kill Spalko."
"At last," Bourne said, "something to thank Stepan Spalko for."
Khan shook his head. "This can't work. I don't trust you and I know you don't trust
me."
"I'm willing to try," Bourne said. "Whatever's between us, this is far bigger."
"Don't tell me what to think," Khan said shortly. "I don't need you for that; I never
did." He managed to raise his head and look at Bourne. "All right, here's how it goes. I'll
agree to work together with you on one condition. You find us a way out of here."

"Done." Bourne's smile confounded Khan. "Unlike you, I've had a great many hours to
think about escaping from this room. I had assumed that even if I somehow managed to
free myself from the chair, I wouldn't get far using conventional methods. At the time I
was quite unable to go up against a squadron of Spalko's guards. So I came up with
another solution."
Khan's expression registered annoyance. He hated that this man knew more than he did.
"Which is?"
Bourne nodded in the direction of the grate.
"The drain?" Khan said incredulously.
"Why not?" Bourne knelt beside the grate. "The diameter is large enough to get
through." He gestured as he snapped open the switchblade and inserted the blade between
the grate and its flush housing. "Why don't you give me a hand?"
As Khan knelt on the opposite side of the grate, Bourne used the knifeblade to raise it
slightly. Khan lifted it up. Putting aside the switchblade, Bourne joined him and, together,
they heaved the grate all the way up.
Khan could see Bourne wince with the effort. At that moment an eerie sensation rose
in him, both strange and familiar, a kind of pride he was able to identify only at length
and with considerable pain. It was an emotion he'd felt when he was a boy, before he'd
wandered in shock, lost and abandoned, out of Phnom Penh. Since then, he'd so
successfully walled it off that it hadn't been a problem for him. Until now.
They rolled the grate aside and Bourne took up some of the bloody bandage that
Spalko had ripped off him and wrapped his cell phone. Then he put it and the closed
switchblade in his pocket. "Who'll go first?" he asked.
Khan shrugged, giving no sign that he was in any way impressed. He had a good idea
where the drain led, and he believed Bourne did, too. "It's your idea."
Bourne levered himself into the circular hole. "Wait ten seconds, then follow me
down," he said just before he vanished from sight.
Annaka was elated. As they sped toward the airport in Spalko's armor-plated limousine,
she knew no one and nothing could stop them. Her last-minute ploy with Ethan Hearn
hadn't been necessary, as it turned out, but she didn't regret the overture. It always paid to
err on the side of caution, and at the time she'd decided to confront Hearn, Spalko's fate
seemed to have hung in the balance. Looking over at him now, she knew that she never
should have doubted him. He had the courage, skills and worldwide resources to pull off
anything, even this audacious power coup. She had to admit that when he'd first told her
what he planned, she'd been skeptical, and she'd remained so until he had engineered
their successful emergence on the other side of the Danube through an old air-raid tunnel
he'd discovered when he'd bought the building. When he'd started to renovate it, he'd
successfully erased any notation of it from the architectural plans so that it remained, up
until the moment he'd shown it to her, his personal secret.
The limo and driver had been waiting for them on the far side in the fiery glow of the
late afternoon sunshine, and now they were speeding along the motorway toward
Ferihegy Airport. She moved closer to Stepan, and when his charismatic face turned
toward her, she took his hand briefly in hers. He'd stripped off the bloody butcher's apron

and the Latex gloves somewhere in the tunnel. He wore jeans, a crisp white shirt and
loafers. You'd never know he'd been up all night.
He smiled. "I think a glass of champagne is called for, don't you?"
She laughed. "You think of everything, Stepan."
He indicated the flutes sitting in their niches on the inside panel of her door. They were
crystal, not plastic. As she leaned forward to take them, he removed a split of champagne
from a refrigerated compartment. Outside, the high-rises on either side of the motorway
sped by, reflecting the orb of the lowering sun.
Spalko ripped off the foil, popped the cork and poured the foaming champagne into
first one flute, then the other. He put down the bottle and they clinked glasses in a silent
toast. They sipped together and she looked into his eyes. They were like brother and
sister, closer even because neither carried with them the baggage of sibling rivalry. Of all
the men she had known, she reflected, Stepan came closest to fulfilling her desires. Not
that she'd ever longed for a mate. As a girl, a father would have suited her, but it was not
to be. Instead, she'd chosen Stepan, strong, competent, invincible. He was everything a
daughter would want from her father.
The high-rises were becoming less numerous as they passed through the outermost ring
of the city. The light continued to lower as the sun set. The sky was high and ruddy and
there was very little wind, conditions ripe for a perfect takeoff.
"How about a little music," Spalko said, "to go with our champagne moment?" His
hand was raised to the multi-CD player embedded over his head. "What would please you
most? Bach? Beethoven? No, of course. Chopin."
He chose the corresponding CD and his forefinger pressed a button. But instead of the
lyrical melody typical of her favorite composer, she heard her own voice:
"It isn't Interpol you work for—you don't have their habits. CIA, no, I don't think so.
Stepan would know if the Americans were trying to penetrate his organization. So who
then, hmm?"
Annaka, her flute halfway to her partly open lips, froze.
"Don't look so ashen, Ethan."
She saw, to her horror, Stepan grinning at her over the rim of his flute.
"I don't care, really. I simply want an insurance policy in case things turn sour here.
That insurance policy is you."
Spalko's finger hit the "Stop" button, and save for the muffled thrumming of the limo's
powerful engine, silence overtook them.
"I imagine you're wondering how I came by your treachery."
Annaka found that she had temporarily lost the ability to speak. Her mind was frozen
in place at the precise moment Stepan had very kindly asked her what music would
please her most. More than anything in the world, she wanted to go back to that moment.
Her shocked mind could only reflect on the split in her reality that had opened up like a
yawning abyss at her feet. There was only her perfect life before Spalko had played the
digital recording and the disaster it had become after he'd played it.
Was Stepan still smiling that awful crocodile smile? She found that she was having
difficulty focusing. Without thinking, she swiped at her eyes.

"My God, Annaka, are those genuine tears?" Spalko shook his head ruefully. "You've
disappointed me, Annaka, though, to be perfectly honest, I'd been wondering when you'd
betray me. On that point, your Mr. Bourne was quite correct."
"Stepan, I—" She stopped of her own accord. She hadn't recognized her own voice,
and the last thing she would do was beg. Her life was miserable enough as it was.
He was holding something up between thumb and finger, a tiny disk, smaller even than
a watch battery. "An electronic listening device planted in Hearn's office." He laughed
shortly. "The irony is that I didn't particularly suspect him. One of these is in every new
employee's office, at least for the first six months." He pocketed the disk with the flourish
of a magician. "Bad luck for you, Annaka. Good luck for me."
Swallowing the rest of his champagne, he set the flute down. She still hadn't moved.
Her back was straight, her right elbow cocked. Her fingers surrounded the rim of the
flute's flared bottom.
He looked at her tenderly. "You know, Annaka, if you were anyone else, you'd be dead
by now. But we share a history, we share a mother, if you want to stretch a definition to
its limit." He cocked his head, putting the surface of his face in the last of the afternoon's
light. The side of his face that was as poreless as plastic shone like the glass windows of
the high-rises that were now far behind them. Very little in the way of habitation lay
before them until they turned into the airport proper.
"I love you, Annaka." One hand held her by her waist. "I love you in a way I could
never love anyone else." The bullet from Bourne's gun made surprisingly little noise.
Annaka's torso was thrown back into his welcoming arm and her head came up all at
once. He could feel the tremor run through her and knew that the bullet must have lodged
near her heart. His eyes never left hers. "It really is a pity, isn't it?"
He felt the heat of her running over his hand, down onto the leather seat as her blood
pooled. Her eyes seemed to be smiling, but there was no expression anywhere else on her
face. Even at the point of death, he reflected, she had no fear. Well, that was something,
wasn't it?
"Is everything all right, Mr. Spalko?" his driver asked from up front.
"It is now," Stepan Spalko said.

CHAPTER TWENTY-SEVEN
The Danube was cold and dark. The grievously injured Bourne hit the river-water first,
where the drain emptied out, but it was Khan who had difficulty. The extreme chill of the
water was of no import to him, but the darkness brought to him the nightmarish horror of
his recurring dream.
The shock of the water, the surface so distant above his head, caused him to feel as if
his ankle was tied to the white semi-decomposed body, spinning slowly below him in the
depth. Lee-Lee was calling to him, Lee-Lee wanted him to join her....
He felt himself tumbling into darkness, even deeper water. And then, quite suddenly
and terrifyingly, he was being pulled. By Lee-Lee? he wondered in a panic.

All at once he felt the warmth of another body, large and, despite its wounds, still
immensely powerful. He felt Bourne's arm circle his waist, the surge of Bourne's legs as
he kicked them out of the swift current into which Khan had fallen, driving them upward
toward the surface.
Khan seemed to be crying, or at least crying out, but when they breached the surface
and made for the far shore, Khan struck out, as if he wanted nothing more than to punish
Bourne, to beat him senseless. But all he could manage at the moment was to tear the
encircling arm from around his waist and glare at Bourne as they pulled themselves
against the stone embankment.
"What did you think you were doing?" Khan said. "You almost caused me to drown!"
Bourne opened his mouth to answer him, but apparently thought better of it. Instead,
he pointed downriver to where a vertical iron rose out of the water. Across the deep blue
water of the Danube, fire trucks, ambulances and police cars still ringed the Humanistas,
Ltd., building. Crowds had joined the knots of evacuated employees, surging like surf
along the sidewalks, spilling through the streets, hanging out windows, craning their
necks for a better angle. Boats sailing up and down the river were converging on the spot
and even though members of the police force waved them away, the passengers rushed to
the railing to get a closer look at what they thought might be a disaster in the making. But
they were too late. It appeared that whatever fires had been started by the explosion in the
elevator shaft had been extinguished.
Bourne and Khan, sticking to the shadows of the embankment, made their way to the
ladder, which they climbed as quickly as they could. Lucky for them, all eyes were on the
commotion at the Humanistas, Ltd., building. Several yards away, a section of the
embankment was under repair and they were able to crawl into the sheltering shadows
below street level but above the water-line, where the concrete had become undermined
and was now shored up with pillars of heavy timber.
"Give me your phone," Khan said. "Mine's waterlogged."
Bourne unwrapped Conklin's cell phone and handed it over.
Khan dialed Oszkar's cell phone and, when he reached him, told him where they were
and what they required. He listened for a moment and then said to Bourne.
"Oszkar, my contact here in Budapest, is chartering us a flight. And he's getting you
some antibiotics."
Bourne nodded. "Now let's see how good he really is. Tell him we need the schematics
for the Oskjuhlid Hotel in Reykjavik."
Khan glared at him and for a moment Bourne was afraid that he was going to hang up
simply out of spite. He bit his lip. He'd have to remember to talk to Khan in a less
confrontational manner.
Khan told Oszkar what they needed. "It'll take about an hour," he said.
"He didn't say 'impossible'?" Bourne said.
"Oszkar never says 'impossible.'"
"My contacts couldn't have done better."

A chill and fitful wind had sprung up, forcing them to move farther into their makeshift
cave. Bourne took the opportunity to assess the damage Spalko had inflicted on him;
Khan had done well in ministering to the punctures, which were numerous on his arms,
chest and legs. Khan still had on his jacket. He now took it off and shook it out. As he did
so, Bourne saw that the inside was composed of a number of pockets, all of which looked
filled.
"What d'you have in there?" he asked.
"Tricks of the trade," Khan said unhelpfully. He retreated into his own world by using
Bourne's cell phone.
"Ethan, it's me," he said.
"Is everything all right?"
"That depends," Hearn said. "In the mele", I discovered that my office was bugged."
"Does Spalko know who you work for?"
"I never mentioned your name. Anyway, mostly my calls to you were out of the
office."
"Still, it would be wise for you to leave."
"My thoughts exactly," Hearn said. "I'm happy to hear your voice. After the explosions
I didn't know what to think."
"Have a little faith," Khan said. "How much d'you have on him?"
"Enough."
"Take everything you have and get out now. I will have my revenge on him no matter
what happens."
He heard Hearn take a breath, "What's that supposed to mean?"
"It means I want a backup. If for some reason you can't get the material to me, I want
you to contact—hold on a moment." He turned to Bourne and said, "Is there someone at
the Agency who can be trusted with intel on Spalko?"
Bourne shook his head, then immediately reconsidered. He thought about what
Conklin had told him about the Deputy Director—that he was not only fair-minded but
that he was his own man. "Martin Lindros," he said.
Khan nodded and repeated the name to Hearn, then he closed the connection and
handed back the phone.
Bourne felt in a quandary. He wanted to find some way to connect with Khan, but he
didn't know how. Finally, he hit upon the idea of asking him how he had reached the
interrogation room. He felt a relief when Khan began to talk. He told Bourne about
hiding in the sofa, the explosion in the elevator shaft and his escape from the bolted room.
He did not, however, mention Annaka's treachery.
Bourne listened with mounting fascination, but even so, part of him remained detached,
as if this conversation was happening to someone else. He was shying away from Khan;
the psychic wounds were too raw. He recognized that in his present debilitated state, he
was as yet mentally unprepared to tackle the questions and doubts that flooded him. And
so the two of them talked fitfully and awkwardly, always skirting the central issue that
lay between them like a castle that could be sieged but not taken.

An hour later Oszkar arrived in his company van with towels and blankets and new
clothes, along with an antibiotic for Bourne. He gave them a Thermos of hot coffee to
drink. They climbed into the backseat, and while they changed, he bundled up their torn
and sodden clothes, all except Khan's remarkable jacket. Then he gave them bottled water
and food, which they wolfed down.
If he was surprised at the sight of Bourne's wounds, he didn't show it, and Khan
assumed that he'd worked out that the assault had been a success. He presented Bourne
with a lightweight laptop computer.
"The schematics for every system and subsystem in the hotel have been downloaded to
the hard drive," he said, "as well as maps of Reykjavik and the surrounding area and
some basic information I thought might come in handy."
"I'm impressed." Bourne said this to Oszkar, but he meant it for Khan, too.
Martin Lindros got the call just after eleven a.m. Eastern Daylight Time. He jumped
into his car and made the fifteen-minute drive to George Washington Hospital in just
under eight minutes. Detective Harry Harris was in the E.R. Lindros used his credentials
to cut through the red tape so that one of the harried residents took him over to the bed.
Lindros pulled aside the curtain that ran around three sides of the emergency room station,
pulled it shut behind him.
"What the hell happened to you?" he said.
Harris eyed him as best he could from his propped-up position on the bed. His face
was puffy and discolored. His upper lip was split and there was a gash under his left eye
that had been stitched.
"I got fired—that's what happened."
Lindros shook his head. "I don't understand."
"The National Security Advisor called my boss. Directly. Herself. She demanded I be
fired. Dismissed without compensation or pension. This is what he told me when he
summoned me to his office yesterday."
Lindros' hands curled into fists. "And then?"
"What d'you mean? He fired my ass. Disgraced me after the spotless career I've had."
"I mean," Lindros said, "how did you wind up here?"
"Oh, that." Harris turned his head to one side, looking at nothing. "I got drunk, I
guess."
"You guess?"
Harris turned back to him, his eyes blazing. "I got very drunk, okay? I think it was the
least I deserved."
"But you got more than that."
"Yah. There was an argument with a couple of bikers, if I remember right, which
escalated into something of a brawl."
"I suppose you think you deserved to get beaten to a pulp."
Harris said nothing.

Lindros passed a hand across his face. "I know I promised you I'd take care of this,
Harry. I thought I had it under control, even the DCI had come around, more or less. I
just didn't figure on the NSA making a preemptive strike."
"Fuck her," Harris said. "Fuck everyone." He laughed bitterly. "It's like my ma used to
say, 'No good deed goes unpunished.'"
"Look, Harry, I never would've cracked this Schiffer thing without you. I'm not going
to abandon you now. I'll get you out of this."
"Yeah? I'd like the fuck to know how."
"As Hannibal, one of my military icons, once famously said, 'We will either find a way
or make one.'"
When they were ready, Oszkar drove them to the airport. Bourne, whose body was
racked with pain, was happy to let someone else drive. Still, he remained on operational
alert. He was pleased to see that Oszkar was using his mirrors to check for tags. No one
appeared to be following them. Up ahead, he could see the airport's control tower, and a
moment later Oszkar turned off the motorway. There were no cops in sight. Nothing
seemed out of place. Still, he could feel the vibrations start up inside him.
No one came for them as they cruised through the airport roads, heading toward the
charter services airfield. The aircraft was waiting, ready and fueled. They got out of the
van. Before he left, Bourne gripped Oszkar's hand. "Thanks again."
"No problem," Oszkar said with a smile. "It all goes on the bill."
He drove off and they went up the stairs and into the aircraft.
The pilot welcomed them aboard, then pulled up the stairs and closed and locked the
door. Bourne told him their destination and five minutes later they were taxiing down the
runway, lifting off for their two-hour, ten-minute flight to Reykjavik.
"We'll be coming up on the fishing boat in three minutes," the pilot said.
Spalko adjusted the electronic earbud, picked up Sido's refrigerated box and went to
the rear of the plane and shrugged himself into the harness. As he tightened the cinches,
he stared at the back of Peter Sido's head. Sido was handcuffed to his seat. One of
Spalko's armed men was in the seat next to him.
"You know where to take him," he said softly to the pilot.
"Yessir. It won't be anywhere near Greenland."
Spalko went to the rear doorway, signaled to his man, who rose and walked back up
the narrow aisle to join him.
"Are you all right for fuel?"
"Yessir," the pilot answered. "My calculation's right on the money."
Spalko peered out the small round window in the door. They were lower now, the
North Atlantic blue-black, the wave crests a sure sign of its vaunted turbulence.
"Thirty seconds, sir," the pilot said. "There's a pretty stiff wind from the northnortheast. Sixteen knots."

"Roger that." Spalko could feel the slowing of their airspeed. He was wearing a 7-mm
survival dry suit under his clothes. Unlike a diver's wet suit, which relied on a thin layer
of water between the body and the neo-prene suit to keep body temperature up, this was
sealed at the feet and the wrists to keep the water out. Inside the trilaminate shell he wore
a Thermal Protection System Thinsulate undersuit for added protection against the cold.
Still, unless he timed his landing perfectly, the impact of the freezing water could
paralyze him and even with the protection of the suit that would prove fatal. Nothing
could go wrong. He attached the box to his left wrist with a locking chain and drew on
his dry gloves.
"Fifteen seconds," the pilot said. "Wind constant."
Good, no gusts, Spalko thought. He nodded to his man, who pulled down on the huge
lever and swung open the door. The howling of the wind filled the interior of the aircraft.
There was nothing below him but thirteen thousand feet of air, and then the ocean, which
would be as hard as concrete if he hit it at the rate of free fall.
"Go!" the pilot said.
Spalko jumped. There was a rushing in his ears, the wind against his face. He arched
his body. Within eleven seconds he was falling at 110 miles per hour, terminal velocity.
And yet he didn't feel as if he was falling. Rather, the sensation was one of something
softly pressing against him.
He looked down, saw the fishing boat and, using the air pressure, moved himself
horizontally to compensate for the sixteen-knot north-by-northeast wind. Aligning
himself, he checked his wrist altimeter. At twenty-five hundred feet he pulled the rip cord,
felt the gentle tug at his shoulders, the soft rustle of nylon as the canopy deployed above
him. All at once the ten square feet of air resistance his body had provided had been
transformed into 250 square feet of drag. He was now descending at a leisurely sixteen
feet per second.
Above him was the luminous bowl of the sky; below him spread the vastness of the
North Atlantic, restless, heaving, sheened to beaten brass by the late afternoon sunlight.
He saw the fishing boat bobbing and, far off, the jutting curve of the Icelandic peninsula
upon which Reykjavik was built. The wind was a constant tug, and for a time he was
busy compensating by repeatedly flaring the canopy. He breathed deeply, relishing the
pillowy sensation of the drop.
He seemed suspended, then in a shell of endless blue he thought of the meticulous
planning, the years of hard work, maneuvering and manipulation by which he'd reached
this point, what he'd come to view as the pinnacle of his life. He thought of his year in
America, in tropical Miami, the painful procedures to remake and remodel his ruined face.
He had to admit that he'd enjoyed telling Annaka the story of his fictional brother, but
then again, how else would he have explained his presence in the asylum? He could never
tell her that he was having a passionate affair with her mother. It was a simple matter to
bribe the doctors and nurses into giving him private time with their patient. How utterly
corrupt human beings are, he reflected. Much of his success had been built on taking
advantage of that principle.
What an amazing woman Sasa had been! He'd never met her like before or since. Quite
naturally, he'd made the assumption that Annaka would be like her mother. Of course,
he'd been much younger then and his foolishness could be forgiven.

What would Annaka have thought, he wondered now, if he'd told her the truth, that
years ago he'd slaved for a crime boss, a vindictive, sadistic monster who'd sent him out
on a vendetta knowing full well that it could be a trap. It was—and Spalko's face was the
result of it. He'd gotten his revenge on Vladimir, but not in the heroic manner he'd
painted for Zina. It was shameful what he'd done, but in those days he'd lacked the power
to act on his own. But not now.
He was more than five hundred feet in the air when the wind abruptly reversed itself.
He began to sail away from the boat, and he worked the canopy to minimize the effect.
Still, he was unable to reverse his course. Below him, he could see the flash of reflection
on board the fishing boat and knew that the crew was carefully monitoring his descent.
The boat began to move with him.
The horizon was higher, and now the ocean was coming up fast, filling the entire world
as his perspective changed. The wind suddenly died, and he came down, flaring his
canopy at just the right instant, making his landing as soft as possible.
His legs went in first and then he was under the water. Even mentally prepared as he
was, the shock of the freezing water struck a hammerblow that drove all the breath from
him. The weight of the refrigerated box pulled him quickly under, but he compensated
with powerful, practiced scissor-kicks. He surfaced with a swing of his head and took a
deep breath while he shed his harness.
He could hear the grinding churn of the fishing boat's engines echoing in the deep, and
without even bothering to look, he struck out in that direction. The swells were so high
and the current so swift that he soon abandoned the notion of swimming as futile. By the
time the boat came alongside, he was near to being spent. Without the protection of the
dry suit, he knew he would have gone into hypothermia by now.
A crew member threw him a line and a rope ladder was cast over the side. He grabbed
the line and held on with all his strength as they pulled him to the side where the ladder
hung down. He climbed up it, the ocean a constant drag on him until the very last instant.
A strong hand reached down, helping him over the side. He looked up, saw a face with
piercing blue eyes and thick blond hair.
"La ittaha ill Allah" Hasan Arsenov said. "Welcome aboard, Shaykh," Spalko stood
back while crew members wrapped him in absorbent blankets. "La illaha ill Allah," he
replied. "I almost didn't recognize you."
"When I first looked at myself in the mirror after I'd bleached my hair," Arsenov said,
"I didn't either."
Spalko peered at the terrorist leader's face. "How do the contact lenses feel?"
"None of us have had a problem." Arsenov could not take his eyes off the metal box
the Shaykh was holding. "It's here."
Spalko nodded. He glanced over Arsenov's shoulder and saw Zina standing in the last
of the sunlight. Her golden hair streamed out behind her and her cobalt eyes watched his
with an avid intensity.
"Head for shore," Spalko told the crew. "I want to change into dry clothes."
He went below into the forward cabin, where clothes had been neatly stacked on a
berth. A pair of sturdy black shoes were on the deck beneath. He unlocked the box and
set it on the berth. As he stripped off his sopping clothes and peeled off the dry suit, he

glanced at his wrist to see how badly the cuff had abraded his skin. Then he rubbed his
palms together until he'd returned full circulation to his hands.
While his back was turned, the door opened and just as quickly closed. He did not turn
around, did not need to see who'd entered the cabin.
"Let me warm you up," Zina said in honeyed tones.
A moment later he felt the press of her breasts, the heat from her loins against his back
and buttocks. The exhilaration of the jump was still running high through him. It had
been heightened by the final denouement to his long relationship with Annaka Vadas,
making Zina's advance irresistible. He turned, sat back on the edge of the berth and
allowed her to climb all over him. She was like an animal in heat. He saw the glitter of
her eyes, heard the guttural sounds he pulled from her belly. She had lost herself in him,
and he was for the moment satisfied.
Approximately ninety minutes later Jamie Hull was below street level, checking the
security at the Oskjuhlid Hotel's delivery entrance when he caught sight of Comrade
Boris. The Russian security chief evinced surprise at Hull's presence, but Hull wasn't
fooled. He'd had a feeling that Boris had been shadowing him of late, but maybe he was
just being paranoid. Not that he wouldn't be justified. All the principals were in the hotel.
Tomorrow morning at eight a.m. the summit would begin and the time of maximum risk
would be upon him. He dreaded the thought that somehow Comrade Boris had gotten
wind of what Feyd al-Saoud had discovered, what he and the Arab security chief had
concocted.
And so as not to let Comrade Boris get an inkling of the dread in his heart, he put a
smile on his face, preparing himself to eat a bite or two of American crow if he had to.
Anything now to keep Comrade Boris in the dark.
"Working overtime, I see, my good Mr. Hull," Karpov said in his booming announcer's
voice. "No rest for the weary, eh?"
"Time enough for rest when the summit's concluded and our job is done."
"But our job is never done." Karpov, Hull saw, was wearing one of his very bad serge
suits. It looked more like a suit of armor than anything in the least bit fashionable. "No
matter how much we accomplish, there is always more to do. That's one of the charms of
what we do, no?"
Hull felt himself wanting to say no just to be argumentative, but he bit his tongue
instead.
"And how is security here?" Karpov was looking around with his beady raven's eyes.
"Up to your high American standards, one hopes?"
"I've only just begun."
"Then you'll welcome some help, no? Two heads are better than one, four eyes are
better than two."
Hull was abruptly weary. He could no longer remember how long he'd been here in
this godforsaken country or when he'd last had a decent night's sleep. Not even a single
tree to tell you what time of year it was! A kind of disorientation had set in, the sort from
which first-time submariners were said sometimes to suffer.

Hull watched the security team stop a food service truck, question the driver and climb
into the back to check its load. He could find no fault with either the procedure or the
methodology.
"Don't you find this place depressing?" he asked Boris.
"Depressing? This is a fucking wonderland, my friend," Karpov boomed. "Spend a
winter in Siberia if you want a definition of depressing."
Hull frowned. "You were sent to Siberia?"
Karpov laughed. "Yes, but not in the way you think. I was operational up there several
years ago when the tension with China was at its peak. You know, secret military
maneuverings, clandestine intelligence gathering, all in the darkest, coldest place you can
imagine." Karpov grunted. "Or, being American, I suppose you're incapable of imagining
such a thing."
Hull kept the smile stitched to his face, but it cost him in both pent-up anger and selfesteem. Happily, another van was rolling in, the food service vehicle having passed
muster. This one was from Reykjavik Energy. For some reason, it seemed to have piqued
Comrade Boris' interest, and Hull followed him over to where the van was stopped.
Inside were two uniformed men.
Karpov took the call sheet the driver had dutifully handed over to one of the security
personnel, glanced down at it. "What's this all about?" he said in his typically
overaggressive manner.
"Quarterly geothermal checkup," the driver said blandly.
"This has to be done now?" Karpov glared at the blond driver.
"Yes, sir. Our system is interconnected throughout the city. If we don't perform
periodic maintenance, we put the entire network at risk."
"Well, we can't have that," Hull said. He nodded to one of the security men. "Check
inside. If it's all clear, let them through."
He walked away from the van and Karpov followed.
"You don't like this work," Karpov said, "do you?"
Forgetting himself for a moment, Hull turned on his heel and confronted the Russian.
"I like it just fine." Then he remembered, and grinned boyishly. "Nah, you're right. I'd
much rather be using my more, shall we say, physical skills."
Karpov nodded, apparently mollified. "I understand. There's no feeling like a good
kill."
"Exactly," Hull said, warming to his task. "Take this newest sanction, for instance.
What I wouldn't give to be the one to find Jason Bourne and put a bullet through his
brain."
Karpov's caterpillar eyebrows lifted. "For you, this sanction sounds personal. You
should beware such emotionalism, my friend. It clouds good judgment."
"Fuck that," Hull said. "Bourne had what I wanted most, what I should've had."
Karpov considered for a moment. "It seems that I've misjudged you, my good friend
Mr. Hull. It seems that you're more of a warrior than I thought." He clapped the American
on the back. "What d'you say to trading war stories over a bottle of vodka?"

"I think that sounds doable," Hull said, as the Reykjavik Energy van rolled inside the
hotel.
Stepan Spalko, in a Reykjavik Energy uniform, colored contact lenses in his eyes and a
piece of molded Latex making his nose wide and ugly, stepped out of the van and told the
driver to wait. With a work order on a clipboard in one hand and a small toolbox in the
other, he went through the labyrinth in the hotel's belly. The plan of the hotel floated in
his mind like a three-dimensional overlay. He knew his way around the vast complex
better than many of the employees whose work confined them to a single area.
It took him twelve minutes to reach the section of the hotel that housed the space that
would serve as the summit's venue. In that time, he was stopped four times by security
guards even though he was wearing his ID clipped to his overalls. He took the stairs,
went down three levels below-ground, where he was stopped once again. He was near
enough to a thermal heat junction to make his presence there plausible. Still, he was near
enough to the HVAC substation that the guard insisted on accompanying him.
Spalko stopped at an electrical junction box and opened it. He could feel the guard's
scrutiny like a hand at his throat.
"You've been here how long?" he said in Icelandic as he opened the box he was
carrying.
"D'you speak Russian, maybe?" the guard replied.
"As a matter of fact, I do." Spalko rummaged around in the box. "You've been here,
what, two weeks now?"
"Three," the guard admitted.
"And in all that time, have you seen anything of my wonderful Iceland?" He found
what he wanted in among all the junk and palmed it. "Do you know anything about it?"
The Russian shook his head, which was Spalko's cue to launch into his discourse.
"Well, let me enlighten you then. Iceland is an island of 103,000 square kilometers at an
average height of 500 meters above sea level. Its highest peak, Hvannadalshmikur, rises
to 2.119 meters and over 11 percent of the country is covered by glaciers, including
Vatnajokull, the largest in Europe. We're governed by the Althing, whose 63 members
are elected every four—"
His voice died out as the guard, unutterably bored by the guidebook babble, turned his
back and moved away. Instantly he got to work, taking the small disk and pressing it
against two sets of wires until he was sure its four contacts had penetrated the insulation.
"All done here," he said, slamming the junction box closed.
"Now where? The thermal housing?" the guard said, clearly hoping this stint would be
over soon.
"Nah," Spalko said. "I've got to check in with my boss first. I'm off to the van." He
waved as he left, but the guard was already walking in the other direction.
Spalko returned to the van, climbed in, and there he sat next to the driver until a
security guard wandered up.
"Okay, guys, what's up?"

"We're finished here for the time being." Spalko smiled winningly as he made some
meaningless marks on his bogus worksheet. He checked his watch. "Hey, we were here
longer than I thought. Thanks for checking up."
"Hey, it's my job."
As the driver turned on the ignition and put the van in gear, Spalko said, "Here's the
value of making a dry run. We'll have precisely thirty minutes before they come looking
for us."
The chartered jet flung itself through the sky. Across from Bourne sat Khan, staring
straight ahead, looking, it seemed, at nothing. Bourne closed his eyes. The overhead
lights had been turned off. A few reading lights cast oval pools of illumination in the dark.
In an hour they'd be touching down at Keflavik Airport.
Bourne sat very still. He wanted to put his head in his hands and weep bitter tears for
the sins of the past, but with Khan across the aisle he couldn't show anything that might
be misinterpreted as weakness. The tentative detente they'd managed to achieve seemed
as fragile as an eggshell. There were so many things that had the potential to crush it.
Emotions churned in his chest, making it difficult to breathe. The pain he felt all through
his tortured body was as nothing compared to the anguish that threatened to rend his heart
asunder. He grasped the armrests so hard that his knuckles cracked. He knew he had to
gain control of himself, just as he knew that he couldn't sit in his seat a moment longer.
He rose and, like a sleepwalker, slipped across the aisle and lowered himself into the
seat next to Khan. The young man did not in any way register the fact of Bourne's
presence. He might have been deep in meditation, save for the rapid rate of his breathing.
With his heart hammering painfully against his cracked ribs, Bourne said softly, "If
you're my son, I want to know it. If you really are Joshua, I need to know it."
"In other words, you don't believe me."
"I want to believe you," Bourne said, trying to ignore the by-now familiar knife-edge
of Khan's voice. "Surely you must know that."
"When it comes to you, I know less than nothing." Khan turned to him, the hammer of
his rage all in his face. "Don't you remember me at all?"
"Joshua was six, just a child." Bourne felt his emotions rising again, ready to choke
him. "And then some years ago I suffered amnesia."
"Amnesia?" This revelation seemed to startle Khan.
Bourne told him what had happened. "I remember little of my life as Jason Bourne
before that time," he concluded, "and virtually nothing about my life as David Webb,
except when now and again a scent or the sound of a voice dislodges something and I
recall a fragment. But that's all it is, discontinuous from a whole that's forever lost to me."
Bourne tried to find Khan's dark eyes in the low light, searched for the hint of an
expression, even the barest clue as to what Khan might be thinking or feeling. "It's true.
We're complete strangers to each other. So before we go on ..." He broke off, for the
moment unable to continue. Then he steeled himself, forcing himself to speak because
the silence that was so quick to build between them was worse than the explosion that
would surely come. "Try to understand. I need some tangible proof, something
irrefutable."

"Fuck you!"
Khan stood up, about to step over Bourne into the aisle, but again, as in Spalko's
interrogation room, something held him fast. And then, unbidden, he heard Bourne's
voice in his head, spoken on a rooftop in Budapest:
"That's your plan, isn't it? This whole sick story about you being Joshua___7
won'tleadyou to thisSpalko or whoever it is you're planning to get to. I won't be
anyone's cat's-paw again."
Khan gripped the carved stone Buddha around his neck and sat back down. They'd
both been Stepan Spalko's cat's-paws. It was Spalko who'd brought them together and
now, ironically, it was their shared enmity of Spalko that might conceivably keep them
together, at least for the time being.
"There is something," he said in a voice he barely recognizable. "A recurring
nightmare I have of being underwater. I'm being drowned, pulled deeper because I'm tied
to her dead body. She's calling to me, I hear her voice calling to me, or else it's my voice
calling to her."
Bourne recalled Khan's thrashing in the Danube, the panic that had swirled him deeper
into the pull of the current. "What does the voice say?"
"It's my voice. I'm saying 'Lee-Lee, Lee-Lee.'"
Bourne felt his heart skip a beat, for up from the depths of his own damaged memory
swam Lee-Lee. For one precious moment only he could see her oval face with his light
eyes and Dao's straight black hair. "Oh, God," Bourne whispered. "Lee-Lee was Joshua's
nickname for Alyssa. No one else called her that. No one else but Dao knew."
Lee-Lee.
"One of the powerful memories of those days that, with a great deal of help, I've been
able to recall is how your sister looked up to you," Bourne went on. "She'd always
wanted to be close to you. At night, when she went through a bout of night-terrors, you
were the only one who could calm her down. You called her Lee-Lee and she called you
Joshy."
My sister, yes. Lee-Lee. Khan closed his eyes and immediately he was under the murky
water of the river in Phnom Penh. Half-drowned, in shock, he'd seen her tumbling toward
him the shot-up corpse of his little sister. Lee-Lee. Four years old. Dead. Her light eyes—
their Daddy's eyes—staring sightlessly at him, accusingly. Why you? she seemed to say.
Why was it you and not me? But he knew that was his own guilt talking. If Lee-Lee could
have spoken, she would've said, I'm glad you didn't die, Joshy. I'm so happy one of us
stayed to be with Daddy.
Khan put his hand to his face, turned away toward the Perspex window. He wanted to
die, he wished he had died in the river, that it had been Lee-Lee who'd survived. He
couldn't stand this life one second more. There was, after all, nothing left for him. In
death, at least, he would join her....
"Khan."
It was Bourne's voice. But he couldn't face him, couldn't even look him in the eye. He
hated him and he loved him. He couldn't understand how this could be; he was ill
equipped to deal with this emotional anomaly. With a strangled sound, he rose and

pushed past him, staggering up to the front of the aircraft where he wouldn't have to see
Bourne.
With an inexpressible sorrow, Bourne watched his son go. It took an enormous effort
to rein in the impulse to pull him back, to put his arms around him and hug him to his
chest. He sensed that would be the worst thing he could do now, that, given Khan's
history, it might lead to renewed violence between them.
He had no illusions. They both had a hard road to travel before they could accept each
other as family. It could even be an impossible task. But because he wasn't in the habit of
thinking anything was impossible, he set that frightening thought aside.
In a rush of anguish he realized at last why he'd spent so much time denying that Khan
might, in fact, be his son. Annaka, damn her, had nailed it perfectly.
At that moment he looked up. Khan was standing over him, his hands gripping the
seatback in front of him as if for dear life.
"You said that you just found out that I was MIA."
Bourne nodded.
"How long did they look for me?" Khan said.
"You know I can't answer that. No one can." Bourne had lied on instinct. There was
nothing to be gained and much to be lost by telling Khan that the authorities had only
searched for one hour. He was acutely conscious of wanting to protect his son from the
truth.
An ominous stillness had come over Khan, as if he were preparing for an act of terrible
consequence. "Why didn't you check?"
Bourne heard the accusatory tone and sat as if poleaxed. His blood ran cold. Ever since
it became clear that Khan could be Joshua, he'd been asking himself the same question.
"I was half-mad with grief," he said, "but I don't think now that's a good enough excuse.
I couldn't face the fact that I'd failed you all as a father."
Something in Khan's face shifted, showing what was akin to a spasm of pain, as an
ominous thought wormed its way up to the surface. "You must've had ... difficulties when
you and my mother were together in Phnom Penh."
"What d'you mean?" Bourne, alarmed by Khan's expression, responded in a tone that
was perhaps sharper than in ought to have been.
"You know. Didn't you hear it from your colleagues because you were married to a
Thai?"
"I loved Dao with all my heart."
"Marie isn't Thai, is she?"
"Khan, we don't choose whom we fall in love with."
There was a short pause, and then, into the charged silence that had sprung up between
them, Khan said, as casually as if it were an afterthought, "And then there was the matter
of your two mixed-race children."
"I never saw it that way," Bourne said flatly. His heart was breaking, for he heard the
silent cry that underlay this line of questioning. "I loved Dao, I loved you and Alyssa. My
God, you were all my life. In the weeks and months afterward, I nearly lost my mind. I

was devastated, uncertain whether or not I wanted to go on. If not for meeting Alex
Conklin, I might not have. Even so, it took years of agonizingly hard work to recover
sufficiently."
He fell silent for a moment, listening to them both breathe. Then he took a deep breath
and said, "What I've always believed, always struggled with is that I should've been there
to protect you."
Khan regarded him for a long time, but the tension had been broken, some Rubicon
had been crossed. "If you'd been there, you would've been killed, too."
He turned away without another word, and as he did so, Bourne saw Dao in his eyes
and knew that in some profound way the world had changed.

CHAPTER TWENTY-EIGHT
Reykjavik, like any other civilized place on earth, had its fair share of fast food
restaurants. Each day these establishments as well as the more upscale restaurants
received shipments of fresh meats, fish, vegetables and fruit. Hafnarfjordur Fine Fruits &
Vegetables was one of the main suppliers to the fast-food industry in Reykjavik. The
company's van that had pulled up to the Kebab Hollin in City Centre early that morning
with a delivery of leaf lettuce, pearl onions and scallions was one of many that had
fanned out through the city on their daily rounds. The crucial difference was that, unlike
all the others, this particular van had not been dispatched by Hafnarfjordur Fine Fruits &
Vegetables.
By early evening all three sites of the Landspitali University Hospital were besieged by
people who were increasingly ill. Doctors admitted these patients in alarming numbers
even as they ran tests on their blood. By dinnertime the results confirmed that the city had
a virulent outbreak of hepatitis A on its hands.
Health department officials frenziedly went to work to deal with the burgeoning crisis.
Their job was hampered by several important factors: the quickness and severity of the
onset of the particularly virulent strain of the virus, the complexities associated with
trying to track which foodstuffs might be involved and where its source might be, and
unspoken but much on their minds was the intense worldwide spotlight trained on
Reykjavik by the international summit. High on their list of suspect foods were scallions,
the culprits in the recent outbreaks of hepatitis A in the United States, but scallions were
fairly ubiquitous in the local fast food chains, and of course they couldn't rule out meats
or fish.
They worked into the twilit night, interviewing the owners of every company that
specialized in fresh vegetables, sending their own staff out to inspect the warehouses,
storage containers and vans of each firm, including Hafnarfjordur Fine Fruits &
Vegetables. However, much to their surprise and dismay, they found nothing amiss, and
as the hours swept by, they were forced to admit that they were no closer to finding the
source of the outbreak than when they had started.
Accordingly, just after nine p.m., health department officials went public with their
findings. Reykjavik was under a hepatitis A alert. Because they hadn't yet found the

source of the infection, they put the city under quarantine. Over all their heads was the
specter of a full-blown epidemic, something they could not afford with the terrorism
summit beginning and the entire world's attention focused on the capital. In their
television and radio interviews, the officials sought to reassure an uneasy public that they
were taking every measure to gain control over the virus. To that end, they said
repeatedly, the department was devoting its entire staff to the ongoing safety of the public
at large.
It was just before ten p.m. when Jamie Hull walked down the hotel corridor to the
president's suite in a high state of agitation. First, there was the sudden outbreak of
hepatitis A to worry about. Then he was summoned to an unscheduled briefing with the
president.
He looked around and saw the Secret Service men who were guarding the president.
Farther down the corridor were the Russian FSB and Arab security guarding their leaders,
who, for the sake of security and the ease of housing their staffs, had been assigned to
one wing of the hotel.
He went through the door guarded by a pair of Secret Service guards, huge and
impassive as sphinxes, and into the suite. The president was prowling restlessly back and
forth, dictating to a pair of his speechwriters as the press secretary looked on, scribbling
hurried notes on a tablet computer. Three more Secret Service men stood by. They were
keeping the president away from the windows.
He cooled his heels without protest until the president dismissed the press people, and
like mice, they scurried off to another room.
"Jamie," the president said with a big smile and an extended hand. "Good of you to
come." He squeezed Hull's hand, gestured for him to sit, then took a seat across from him.
"Jamie, I'm counting on you to help bring this summit off without a hitch," he said.
"Sir, I can assure you that I have everything under control."
"Even Karpov?"
"Sir?"
The president smiled. "I heard that you and Mr. Karpov have been going at it pretty
good."
Hull swallowed hard, wondering if he'd been brought in to be fired. "There was some
minor friction," he said tentatively, "but that's all in the past."
"I'm glad to hear it," the president said. "I'm having enough difficulties with Aleksandr
Yevtushenko as it is. I don't need him pissed off at me over a slight to his number-one
security chief." He slapped his thighs and rose. "Well, showtime is eight o'clock this
morning. There's still a lot to prepare for." He stuck out his hand as Hull rose. "Jamie, no
one knows better than I how perilous this situation might become. But I think we're
agreed that there's no turning back now."
Outside in the corridor Hull's cell phone rang.
"Jamie, where are you?" the DCI barked in his ear.

"I just came out of a briefing with the president. He was pleased to hear that I have
everything under control, including Comrade Karpov."
But instead of sounding pleased, the DCI forged on in a tense urgent tone. "Jamie,
listen to me carefully. There's another aspect to this situation, which is given strictly on a
need-to-know basis."
Hull automatically looked around and walked quickly out of earshot of the Secret
Service guards. "I appreciate your confidence in me, sir."
"It concerns Jason Bourne," the DCI said. "He wasn't killed in Paris."
"What?" For a moment Hull lost his composure. "Bourne's alive?"
"Alive and kicking."
"Jamie, just so we're on the same page, this call, this conversation, never happened. If
you ever mention it to anyone, I'll deny it ever took place and I'll have your ass in a sling,
are we clear?"
"Perfectly sir."
"I have no idea what Bourne is going to do next, but I always believed that he was
heading your way. He may or may not have killed Alex Conklin and Mo Panov, but he
sure as hell killed Kevin McColl."
"Jesus. I knew McColl, sir."
"We all did, Jamie." The Old Man cleared his throat. "We can't allow that act to go
unpunished."
All at once Hull's rage vanished, to be replaced by a sense of high elation. "Leave it to
me."
"Use caution, Jamie. Your first order of business is keeping the president safe."
"I understand, sir. Absolutely. But you can be sure that if Jason Bourne shows up, he
won't leave the hotel."
"Well, I trust he will," the Old Man said. "Feet first."
Two members of the Chechen cadre were waiting in front of the Reykjavik Energy van
when the health services vehicle, dispatched to the Oskjuhlid Hotel, came around the
corner. The van was parked crosswise in the street and they had placed orange plastic
work cones around and seemed hard at work.
The health services vehicle came to an abrupt halt.
"What are you doing?" one of the health services people said. "This is an emergency."
"Fuck you, little man!" one of the Chechen answered in Icelandic.
"What did you say?" The irate health services worker climbed out of his vehicle.
"Are you blind? We have important work here," the Chechen said. "Use another
fucking route."
Sensing a situation that could turn ugly, the second man got out of the health services
vehicle. Arsenov and Zina, armed and intent, emerged from the back of the Reykjavik
Energy van and herded the suddenly cowed health services workers into the van.

Arsenov and Zina and one other member of the cadre arrived at the delivery entrance
to the Oskjuhlid Hotel in the hijacked vehicle. The other Chechen had taken the
Reykjavik Energy van to pick up Spalko and the remainder of the cadre.
They were dressed as government employees and presented the health department ID
tags that Spalko had procured at great expense to the security detail on duty. When
queried, Arsenov spoke in Icelandic, then changed to halting English when the American
and Arab security people couldn't understand him. He said that they had been sent to
ensure that the hotel kitchen was free of hepatitis A. No one—least of all the various
security teams—wanted any of the dignitaries to come down with the dread virus. With
all due dispatch, they were admitted and directed to the kitchen. This was where the cadre
member went, but Arsenov and Zina had other destinations in mind.
Bourne and Khan were still scrutinizing the schematics of the various Osk-juhlid Hotel
subsystems when the pilot announced that they were landing at Keflavik Field. Bourne,
who had been pacing back and forth while Khan sat with the laptop, reluctantly took his
seat. His body ached horribly, which the aircraft's cramped seating had only exacerbated.
He'd tried to put on hold the feelings that had come up in connection with finding his son.
Their conversations were awkward enough as it was, and he had the distinct impression
that Khan would instinctively shy away from any strong emotion he might show.
The process of working toward a reconciliation was immensely difficult for both of
them. Still, he suspected, it was worse for Khan. What a son needed from his father was
far more complex than what a father needed from his son in order to love him
unconditionally.
Bourne had to admit that he was afraid of Khan, not only of what had been done to him,
of what he had become, but of his prowess, his cleverness and ingenuity. How he had
escaped from the bolted room was a marvel in and of itself.
And there was something else as well, a stumbling block to their accepting each other
and perhaps eventually reconciling, which dwarfed all the other obstacles. In order to
accept Bourne, Khan had to give up everything his life had been.
In this Bourne was correct. Ever since Bourne had sat down next to him on the park
bench in Old Town Alexandria, Khan had been a man at war with himself. He still was,
the only difference being that now the war was in the open. As if staring into a rear-view
mirror, Khan could see all the opportunities he'd had to kill Bourne, but it was only now
that he understood that his decision not to take them had been deliberate. He couldn't
harm Bourne, but he couldn't open his heart to him either. He remembered the desperate
urge he'd felt to launch himself at Spalko's men at the rear of the clinic in Budapest. The
only thing that had stopped him was Bourne's warning. At the time he'd put his feelings
down to his desire for revenge against Spalko. But now he knew that it stemmed from
another emotion entirely: the devotion one family member has for another.
And yet, to his shame, he realized that he was afraid of Bourne. He was a fearsome
man in strength, endurance and intellect. Being near him, Khan felt somehow diminished,
as if whatever he'd managed to accomplish in his life was as dust.
With a roll, a bump and a brief squeal of rubber, they were down and taxiing off the
active runway toward the far end of the airport, where all private aircraft were directed.
Khan was up and heading down the aisle to the door before they had come to a halt.

"Let's go," he said. "Spalko already has at least a three-hour start on us."
But Bourne had also risen and was standing in the aisle to oppose him.
"There's no telling what's waiting for us out there. I'll go out first."
Immediately, Khan's anger, so near the surface, flared. "I told you once—don't tell me
what to do! I have my own mind; I make my own decisions. I always have and I always
will."
"You're right. I'm not trying to take anything away from you," Bourne said with his
heart in his mouth. This stranger was his son. Everything he said or did around him
would have exaggerated consequences for some time to come. "But consider, up until
now you've been alone."
"And whose fault d'you think that is?"
It was difficult not to take offense, but Bourne did his best to defuse the accusation.
"There's no point in talking of blame," he said equally. "Now we're working together."
"So I should just concede control to you?" Khan answered hotly. "Why? D'you for a
minute think you've earned it?"
They were almost to the terminal. He could see just how fragile their detente was.
"It would be foolish to believe that I've earned anything with you." He glanced out the
window at the bright lights of the terminal. "I was thinking that if there's a problem—if
we're walking into some kind of trap—I'd rather it be me than you who—"
"Have you not listened to anything I've told you?" Khan said as he shouldered past
Bourne. "Have you discounted everything I've done?"
By this time the pilot had appeared. "Open the door," Khan ordered him brusquely.
"And stay onboard."
The pilot dutifully opened the door and dropped the stairs down to the tarmac.
Bourne took one step down the aisle. "Khan—"
But the glare from his son stopped him in his tracks. He watched from the Perspex
window as Khan went down the stairs and was met by an Immigration official. He saw
Khan show him a passport, then point to the aircraft. The immigration official stamped
Khan's passport and nodded.
Khan turned and trotted up the steps. When he came down the aisle, he withdrew a pair
of handcuffs from under his jacket, slapped them on Bourne and then on himself.
"My name is Khan LeMarc and I'm a deputy inspector for Interpol." Khan took the
laptop under his arm and began to lead Bourne back down the aisle. "You're my
prisoner."
"What's my name?" Bourne said.
"You?" Khan pushed him out the door, following closely behind. "You're Jason
Bourne, wanted for murder by the CIA, the Quai d'Orsay and Interpol. It's the only way
he'd admit you to Iceland without a passport. Anyway, he, like every other official on the
planet, has read the CIA circular."
The Immigration official stood back, giving them a wide berth as they walked past him.
Khan unlocked the cuffs as soon as they were through the terminal. Out front, they got

into the first taxi in the queue and gave the driver an address that was within a half-mile
of the Oskjuhlid Hotel.
Spalko, the refrigerated box between his legs, sat in the passenger's seat of the
Reykjavik Energy van as the Chechen rebel drove through the streets of City Centre
toward the Oskjuhlid Hotel. His cell phone rang and he opened it. It wasn't good news.
"Sir, we were successful in closing off the interrogation room before the police or
firemen entered the building," his head of security said from Budapest. "However, we've
just completed an exhaustive sweep of the entire building without finding a sign of either
Bourne or Khan."
"How is that possible?" Spalko said. "One was strapped down and the other was
trapped in a room filled with gas."
"There was an explosion," his security chief said, and he went on to describe in detail
what they'd found.
"Goddammit!" In a rare display of anger Spalko slammed his fist against the console of
the van.
"We're expanding the search perimeter."
"Don't bother," Spalko said shortly. "I know where they are."
Bourne and Khan walked toward the hotel.
"How are you feeling?" Khan asked.
"I'm fine," Bourne replied a little too quickly.
Khan glanced at him. "Not even stiff and sore?"
"All right, I'm stiff and sore," Bourne conceded.
"The antibiotics Oszkar brought you are state of the art."
"Don't worry," Bourne said. "I'm taking them."
"What makes you think I'm worried?" Khan pointed. "Take a look at that."
The perimeter of the hotel was cordoned off by the local police. Two checkpoints
manned both by police and by security personnel of various nationalities were the only
ways in and out. As they watched, a Reykjavik Energy van pulled up to the checkpoint at
the rear of the hotel.
"That's the only way we're going to get in," Khan said.
"Well, it's one way," Bourne said. As the van went through the checkpoint, he saw a
pair of hotel employees walking out from behind it.
Bourne glanced at Khan, who nodded. He'd seen them, too. "What d'you think?"
Bourne said.
"Going off-duty, I'd say," Khan replied.
"That was my thought."
The hotel employees were talking animatedly to each other and paused only long
enough to show their IDs as they went through the checkpoint. Normally, they would
have driven into and out of the hotel, using the underground car park, but since the

security services had arrived, all hotel personnel were obliged to park on the streets
surrounding the hotel.
They shadowed the two men as they turned down a side street, out of sight of the
police and guards. Waiting until they neared their cars, they took them down from behind,
silently and swiftly. Using the keys, they opened the trunks, placed the unconscious
bodies inside, taking the hotel IDs before slamming the trunks closed.
Five minutes later they appeared at the other checkpoint in the front of the hotel so as
not to come into contact with the policeman and security people who had checked the
two hotel workers as they'd walked out.
They passed through the security ring without incident. At last they were inside the
Oskjuhlid Hotel.
The time had come to sever Arsenov, Stepan Spalko thought. The moment had long
been brewing, ever since he found that he could no longer bear Arsenov's weakness.
Arsenov had once said to him, "I'm no terrorist. All I want is for my people to receive
their due." Such a childish belief was a fatal flaw. Arsenov could delude himself all he
wanted, but the truth was that whether he was asking for money, for prisoners returned,
or for his land back, he was marked a terrorist by his methodology not by his aims. He
killed people if he didn't get what he wanted. He targeted enemies and civilians—men,
women, children—it made no difference to him. What he was sowing was terror; what he
would reap was death.
Accordingly, Spalko ordered him to take Akhmed, Karim, and one of the females
down to the substation of the HVAC system that supplied the air to the summit's forum.
This was a slight change in plan. Magomet had been assigned to go with the three others.
But Magomet was dead, and since it had been Arsenov who had killed him, he accepted it
without question or complaint. In any event, they were now on a strict timetable.
"We have precisely thirty minutes from the moment we arrived in the Reykjavik
Energy van," he said. "After that, as we know from the last time, security will come to
check up on us." He consulted his watch. "Which means we now have twenty-four
minutes to accomplish our mission."
As Arsenov left with Akhmed and the other cadre members, Spalko pulled Zina aside.
"You understand that this will be the last time you see him alive."
She nodded her blond head.
"You have no misgivings?" "On the contrary, it'll be a relief," she replied.
Spalko nodded. "Come on." He hurried them down the corridor. "There's no time to
waste."
Hasan Arsenov took immediate control of his little group. They had a vital function to
perform, and he would make certain they performed it. They turned the corner and saw
the security guard at his post near the large air discharge grille.
Without breaking stride, they came toward him.
"Hold it right there," he said, bringing his machine pistol off his chest.

They stopped in front of him. "We're from Reykjavik Energy," Arsenov said in
Icelandic and then, in response to the guard's blank look, repeated it in English.
The guard frowned. "There're no heat vents here."
"I know," Akhmed said, grabbing the machine pistol with one hand and slamming the
guard's head against the wall with the other.
The guard started to go down and Akhmed hit him again, this time with the butt of his
own machine pistol.
"Give me a hand here," Arsenov said, digging his fingers into the air discharge grille.
Karim and the female pitched in, but Akhmed kept smashing the butt of his weapon into
the guard, even after it was clear that he was unconscious and likely to stay that way for
some time.
"Akhmed, give me the weapon!"
Akhmed tossed the machine pistol to Arsenov, then began kicking the fallen guard in
the face. Blood was flowing and there was death in the air.
Arsenov forcibly dragged Akhmed away from the security guard. "When I give you an
order, you'll obey it or, by Allah, I'll break your neck."
Akhmed, his chest heaving, glared at Arsenov.
"We're on a schedule," Arsenov said fiercely. "You don't have time to indulge
yourself."
Akhmed bared his teeth and laughed. Shrugging off Arsenov's grip, he went to help
Karim take off the grille. They shoved the guard into the air shaft, then, one by one, they
crawled in after him. Akhmed, the last in, pulled the grille back in place.
They were obliged to crawl over the guard. As Arsenov did so, he pressed his fingers
to the carotid artery. "Dead," he said.
"So what?" Akhmed said belligerently. "Before the morning's over, they'll all be dead."
On hands and knees, they crawled along the shaft until they came to the junction.
Directly ahead of them was a vertical shaft. They deployed their rappeling gear. Placing
the aluminum bar across the top of the vertical shaft, they belayed the rope and let it
uncoil into the space below them. Taking the lead, Arsenov wrapped the rope around his
left thigh and over his right. Moving hand under hand, he descended down the shaft at a
steady pace. By the small shivering of the line, he became aware when each member of
the cadre began to rappel down after him.
Just above the first junction box, Arsenov stopped. Flicking on a mini-flashlight, he
played its concentrated beam over the wall of the shaft, illuminating the vertical lines of
trunk cables and electric lines. In the middle of the tangle, something new gleamed.
"Heat sensor," he called up.
Karim, the electronics expert, was just above him. While Arsenov played his flashlight
onto the wall, the man took out pliers and a length of wire with alligator clips on either
end. Climbing carefully over Arsenov, he kept going until he hung just above the outer
range of the detector. Kicking out with one foot, he swung toward the wall, grabbed a
trunk cable and held on. His fingers picked through the nest of wires, cut one, to which he
attached one alligator clip. Then he stripped the insulation off the middle of another wire
and attached the other alligator clip to it.

"All clear," he said softly.
He moved down into the range of the sensor, but there was no alarm. He'd successfully
bypassed the circuit. So far as the sensor knew, nothing was amiss.
Karim made way for Arsenov, who led them down to the bottom of the shaft. They
were in range of the heart of the summit forum's HVAC subsystem.
"Our objective is the summit forum's HVAC subsystem," Bourne said as he and Khan
hurried through the lobby. Khan carried the laptop they'd gotten from Oszkar under his
arm. "That's the logical place for them to activate the diffuser."
At this hour of the night, the lobby, vast, high-ceilinged and cold, was deserted save
for various security and hotel personnel. The dignitaries were in their suites, either
sleeping or prepping for the start of the summit, which was only hours away.
"Security has undoubtedly come to the same conclusion," Khan said, "which means
that we'll be all right until we get near the substation's hub, then they're going to want to
know what we're doing in that area."
"I've been thinking about that," Bourne said. "It's time we used my condition to our
advantage."
They went through the main section of the hotel without incident and passed through a
decorative inner courtyard of geometric gravel paths, sheared evergreen shrubs, and
futuristic-looking stone benches. On the other side was the forum section. Inside, they
went down three flights of stairs. Khan activated the laptop and they checked the
schematics, reassuring themselves that they were on the right level.
"This way," Khan said, closing the computer as they moved off.
But they'd gotten only a hundred feet from the stairwell when a harsh voice said, "Take
another step and you're both dead men."
At the bottom of the vertical air shaft, the Chechen rebels waited, crouched, anxious,
their nerves strained to the breaking point. They had been awaiting this moment for
months. They were primed, aching to move forward. They shivered as much from the
unbearable anticipation as from the chill air, which had grown colder the deeper they
went below the hotel. They had only to crawl along a short horizontal shaft to get to the
HVAC relays, but they were separated from their objective by the security personnel in
the corridor outside by the grillwork. Until the guards moved off on their rounds, they
were at bay.
Ahkmed checked his watch and saw that they had fourteen minutes to complete their
mission and return to the van. Beads of sweat stood out on his forehead and, gathering in
his armpits, ran down his side, prickling his skin. His mouth was dry and his breathing
shallow. It was always this way on the cusp of a mission. His heart beat fast and his entire
body vibrated.
He was still seething from Arsenov's rebuke, which had come in front of the others and
so was doubly offensive. As he listened, his ears straining, he stared at Arsenov,
contempt in his heart. After that night in Nairobi, he'd lost all respect for Arsenov, not
only because he was being cuckolded but because he had no idea. Akhmed's thick lips
curled into a smile. It felt good to have this power over Arsenov.

At last he heard the voices receding. He sprang forward, eager now to meet his destiny,
but Arsenov's powerful arm checked him painfully.
"Not yet." Arsenov's eyes glowered.
"They've moved off," Akhmed said. "We're wasting time."
"We go when I give the orders."
This further affront was too much for Akhmed. He spat, his contempt on his face.
"Why should I follow your orders? Why should any of us? You cannot even keep your
woman in her place."
Arsenov lunged at Akhmed and for a moment they grappled indecisively. The others
stood by, terrified to interfere.
"I'll tolerate no more of your insolence," Arsenov said. "You'll follow my orders or I'll
see you dead."
"Kill me then," Akhmed said. "But know this: In Nairobi on the night before the
demonstration, Zina entered the Shaykh's room while you were asleep."
"Liar!" Arsenov said, thinking of the pledge he and Zina had made to each other at the
cove. "Zina would never betray me."
"Think of where my room was, Arsenov. You made the assignments. I saw her with
my own eyes."
Arsenov's eyes glowed with enmity, but he let Akhmed go. "I would kill you now
except that we all have vital roles to play in the mission." He gestured to the others. "Let's
get on with it."
Karim, the electronics expert, went first, then the female and Akhmed, while Arsenov
brought up the rear. Soon enough Karim lifted a hand, bringing them to a halt.
Arsenov heard his soft voice float back to them. "Motion sensor."
He saw Karim crouching down, preparing his equipment. He was grateful for the
presence of this man. How many bombs had Karim constructed for them over the years?
All had worked flawlessly; he never made a mistake.
As before, Karim drew out a length of wire with the alligator clips at either end. With
his pliers in one hand, he searched out the proper electrical wires, isolating them, cutting
into one and applying an alligator clip to the bare copper end. Then, as before, he stripped
away the insulation from the second wire and attached the other alligator clip, creating
the bypass loop.
"All clear," Karim said, and they moved forward into range of the motion sensor.
The alarm went off, shrilling through the corridor, bringing the security guards running,
their machine pistols at the ready.
"Karim!" Arsenov cried.
"It's a trap!" Karim wailed. "Someone crossed the wires!"
Moments before, Bourne and Khan turned slowly to confront the American security
guard. He was dressed in army fatigues and riot gear. He came a step closer, peering at
their ID tags. He relaxed somewhat, putting the machine pistol up, but the deep frown
didn't leave his face.

"What are you guys doing down here?"
"Maintenance checks," Bourne said. He remembered the Reykjavik Energy truck he'd
seen entering the hotel as well as something in the material Oszkar had downloaded to
the laptop. "The thermal heating system's gone offline. We're supposed to be helping the
people the energy company sent over.
"You're in the wrong section," the guard said, pointing. "You need to go back the way
you came, make a left, then left again."
"Thanks," Khan said. "I guess we got turned around. We're not normally in this
section."
As they turned to leave, Bourne's legs went out from under him. He gave a deep groan
and fell.
"What the hell!" the guard said.
Khan knelt beside Bourne, opened his shirt.
"Jesus Christ," the guard said, leaning over to stare at Bourne's wounded torso, "what
the hell happened to him?"
Khan reached up, jerked down hard on the front of the guard's uniform, slamming the
side of his head into the concrete floor. As Bourne rose, Khan stripped the clothes off the
guard.
"He's more your size than mine," Khan said, handing Bourne the fatigues.
Bourne climbed into the guard's uniform while Khan dragged the unconscious form
into the shadows.
At that moment the motion sensor alarm screamed and they took off toward the
substation at a run.
The security guards were well trained, and, commendably, the Americans and Arabs
who were on duty this shift worked together flawlessly. Each kind of sensor had a
different-sounding alarm, so they knew immediately that the motion sensor had been
tripped and precisely where it was. They were on hair-trigger alert and, this close to the
summit, were under orders to shoot first and ask questions later.
As they ran, they opened fire, raking the grillwork with automatic fire. Half of them
emptied their magazines into the suspect area. The other half stood back in reserve while
the others used crowbars to pry off the ruined grilles. They found three bodies, two men
and a woman. One of the Americans notified Hull and one of the Arabs contacted Feyd
al-Saoud.
By this time, more security personnel from other sectors on the floor had converged on
the site to offer added support.
Two of the personnel held in reserve climbed into the air shaft, and when it was
determined that no other hostiles were in evidence, they secured the area. Others dragged
the three chewed-up corpses out of the air shaft, along with Karim's paraphernalia for
bypassing sensors and what at first glance looked like a time bomb.
Jamie Hull and Feyd al-Saoud arrived almost at the same time. Hull took one look at
the situation and called his chief of staff via the wireless network.

"As of this moment, we're on red alert. There's been a breach of security. We have
three hostiles down, repeat, three hostiles down. Put the entire hotel on absolute
lockdown, no one in or out of the premises." He continued to bark orders, moving his
men into the planned position for a red alert. Then he contacted the Secret Service, who
were with the president and his staff in the dignitary wing.
Feyd al-Saoud had squatted down and was studying the corpses. The bodies were
pretty well shot up, but their faces, though blood-streaked, were intact. He took out a pen
flash, shone it on one of the faces. Then he reached out, put his forefinger against the eye
of one of the males. His fingertip came away blue; the corpse's iris was dark brown.
One of the FSB men must have contacted Karpov because the Alpha Unit commander
appeared at an ungainly lope. He was out of breath and Feyd al-Saoud guessed that he'd
run all the way.
He and Hull briefed the Russian on what had happened. He held up his fingertip.
"They're wearing colored contacts—and look here, they've dyed their hair to pass for
Icelanders."
Karpov's face was grim. "I know this one," he said, kicking one of the male corpses.
"His name's Akhmed. He's one of Hasan Arsenov's top lieutenants."
"The Chechen terrorist leader?" Hull said. "You'd better inform your president, Boris."
Karpov stood up, fists on hips. "What I want to know is where's Arsenov?"
"I would say that we're too late," Khan said from behind a metal column, as he
watched the arrival of the two security chiefs, "except that I don't see Spalko."
"It's possible that he wouldn't put himself at risk by coming to the hotel," Bourne said.
Khan shook his head. "I know him. He's both an egotist and a perfectionist. No, he's
here somewhere."
"But not here, obviously," Bourne said thoughtfully. He was watching the Russian
jogging up to Jamie Hull and the Arab security chief. There was something vaguely
familiar about that flat, brutal face, the beetling brow and caterpillar eyebrows. When he
heard the other's voice, he said, "I know that man. The Russian."
"No surprise there. I recognize him, too," Khan said. "Boris Illyich Karpov, head of the
FSB's elite Alpha Unit."
"No, I mean I know him."
"How? Where?"
"I don't know," Bourne said. "Is he friend or foe?" He beat his fists against his forehead.
"If only I could remember."
Khan turned to him and clearly saw the anguish that racked him. He felt a dangerous
urge to grasp Bourne's shoulder and reassure him. Dangerous because he didn't know
where the gesture would lead or even what it would mean. He felt the further
disintegration of his life that had begun the moment Bourne sat down beside him and
spoke to him. "Who are you?" he had said. At the time, Khan had known the answer to
that question; now he wasn't sure. Could it be that everything he'd believed, or thought
he'd believed, was a lie?

Khan took refuge from these deeply disturbing thoughts by cleaving to what he and
Bourne knew best. "I'm bothered by that object," he said. "It's a time bomb. You said that
Spalko was planning to use Dr. Schiffer's bio-diffuser."
Bourne nodded. "I'd say that this was a classic diversion, except for the fact that it's
now just past midnight. The summit isn't scheduled to begin for another eight hours."
"That's why they've used a time bomb."
"Yes, but why set it now, so far in advance?" Bourne said.
"Less security," Khan pointed out.
"True, but there's also more chance of its being discovered during one of security's
periodic sweeps." Bourne shook his head. "No, we're missing something, I know it.
Spalko has something else in mind. But what?"
Spalko, Zina and the remainder of the cadre had reached their objective. Here, far from
the section of the hotel housing the summit's forum, security, though tight, had gaps in it
that Spalko was able to exploit. Though there were many security people, they couldn't
be everywhere at once, and so by taking out two guards, Spalko and his team were soon
in position.
They were three levels below the street in a huge concrete windowless space,
completely enclosed save for a single open doorway. Masses of huge black pipes ran
through the concrete wall on the far side of the space, each labeled with the section of the
hotel it served.
The cadre now broke out their HAZMAT suits and put them on, carefully sealing them.
Two of the Chechen females went into the passage to stand guard just outside the
doorway, and a male rebel backed them up inside.
Spalko opened the larger of the two metal containers he carried. Inside was the NX 20.
He carefully fitted the two halves together, checking that all the fittings were securely
fastened. He handed it to Zina while he unlocked the refrigerated container Peter Sido
had provided. The glass vial it contained was small, almost minuscule. Even after they
had seen its effect in Nairobi, it was difficult to believe that such a small amount of the
virus could be lethal to so many people.
As he'd done in Nairobi, he opened the loading chamber on the diffuser and placed the
vial into it. He closed and locked the chamber, took the NX 20 from Zina's arms and
curled his finger around the smaller of the two triggers. Once he squeezed it, the virus,
still sealed in its special vial, would be injected into the firing chamber. After that, all that
was required was for him to press the button on the left side of the stock, which would
lock the firing chamber, and, when it was aimed correctly, pull the main trigger.
He cradled the bio-diffuser in his arms as Zina had done. This weapon needed to be
given the proper respect, even from him.
He looked into Zina's eyes, which were shining with her love for him and her patriot's
zeal. "Now we wait," he said, "for the sensor alarm."
They heard it then, the sound faint but its vibrations unmistakable, magnified by the
bare concrete corridors. The Shaykh and Zina smiled into each other's faces. He could
feel the tension come into the room, fueled by righteous anger and an expectation of
redemption long denied.

"Our moment is at hand," he said, and they all heard him, all reacted. He could almost
hear their ululation of victory begin.
With the unstoppable force of destiny propelling him forward, the Shaykh pulled the
small trigger, and with an ominous whisper, the payload clicked home into the firing
chamber, where it rested, waiting for the moment of its release.

CHAPTER TWENTY-NINE
"They're all Chechens, isn't that right, Boris?" Hull said.
Karpov nodded. "All, according to the records, members of Hasan Ar-senov terrorist
group."
"This is a coup for the good guys," Hull exulted.
Feyd al-Saoud, shivering in the damp and chill, said, "With the amount of C4 in that
time bomb, they would've taken out almost the entire weight-bearing substructure. The
forum above would've collapsed of its own weight, killing everyone inside."
"Lucky for us they tripped the motion sensor," Hull said.
As the minutes passed, Karpov's frown had grown only deeper as he echoed Bourne's
query, "Why set the bomb so far in advance? I think we had a good chance of finding it
before the summit started."
Feyd al-Saoud turned to one of his men. "Is there some way to turn up the heat down
here? We're going to be here for some time and I'm already freezing."
"That's it!" Bourne said, turning to Khan. He took his laptop, turned it on, scrolling
through the schematics until he found the one he wanted. He traced a route from where
they were back toward the main section of the hotel. Snapping the computer closed, he
said, "Come on! Let's go!"
"Where are we headed?" Khan asked as they made their way through the maze of the
sublevel.
"Think about it. We saw a Reykjavik Energy van pull into the hotel; the entire hotel is
heated by the thermal system that services the city as a whole."
"That's why Spalko sent those Chechens to the HVAC subsystem now," Khan said as
they raced around a corner. "They were never meant to succeed in planting the bomb. We
were right, it was a diversion, but not for later this morning when the summit is scheduled
to start. He's going to activate the bio-diffuser now!"
"Right," Bourne said. "Not through the HVAC subsystem. His target is the main
thermal heating system. At this time of night all the dignitaries are in their rooms, right
where he's going to release the virus."
"Someone coming," one of the female Chechens said.
"Kill them," the Shaykh commanded.
"But it's Hasan Arsenov!" cried the other female guard.

Spalko and Zina exchanged a bewildered look. What had gone wrong? The sensor had
been tripped, the alarm had gone off, and shortly thereafter they'd heard the satisfying
bursts of automatic gunfire. How had Arsenov escaped?
"I said kill him!" Spalko shouted.
What haunted Arsenov, what had made him turn tail at the instant he smelled the trap,
thus saving himself from the sudden death suffered by his compatriots, was the terror that
had been lurking inside him, the thing that had given him nightmares for the past week.
He had told himself that it was his guilt at having betrayed Khalid Murat—a hero's guilt
at having made the hard choice that would save his people. But the truth of the matter
was his terror had to do with Zina. He had not been able to admit to seeing her
withdrawal, gradual but inexorable, her emotional distance that, in retrospect, had
become glacial. She had been slipping away from him for some time, though even up to a
few moments ago he had refused to believe it. But now Akhmed's revelation had thrown
it into the light of consciousness. She had lived behind a glass wall, always keeping part
of herself aloof and hidden. He couldn't touch that part of her, and it seemed to him now
that the harder he'd tried, the further away she pulled herself.
Zina didn't love him—he wondered now whether she ever had. Even if their mission
was a complete success, there would be no life with her, no children they could share
together. What a farce their last intimate conversation had been!
All at once, he was overcome by shame. He was a coward—he loved her more than he
loved his freedom, for without her he knew there would be no freedom for him. In the
wake of her betrayal, victory would be like ashes in his mouth.
Now, as he pounded down the cold corridor toward the thermal heating station, he saw
one of his own people raise her machine pistol as if she was going to shoot him. Perhaps
in the HAZMAT suit she couldn't tell who was coming toward her.
"Wait! Don't shoot!" he cried. "It's Hasan Arsenov!"
A bullet from her opening volley struck him in the left arm, and half in shock, he spun
around, diving around a corner, away from the deadly spray of ricocheting bullets.
In the abrupt frenzy of the present, there was no more time for questions or speculation.
He heard renewed gunfire but not in his direction. Peering around the corner, he saw that
the two females had turned their backs to him and, crouched, were firing at two figures as
they advanced down the passageway.
Arsenov rose and, taking advantage of the diversion, headed for the doorway to the
thermal heating station.
Spalko heard the gunfire and said, "Zina, that can't be just Arsenov."
Zina swung her machine pistol around, nodded to the guard, who threw her a second
one.
Behind them, Spalko went over to the wall of thermal heating pipes. Each one had a
valve and, beside it, a gauge that showed the pressure. He found the pipe that
corresponded to the dignitaries' wing, began to unscrew the valve.

Hasan Arsenov knew that he'd been meant to die with the others in the HVAC
substation. "It's a trap! Someone crossed the wires!" Karim had wailed just before he'd
died. Spalko had crossed the wires; he'd needed not simply a diversion, as he'd told them,
but scapegoats—targets of enough importance that their deaths would occupy the security
for a sufficient amount of time for Spalko to reach the real objective and release the virus.
Spalko had tricked him and, Arsenov was quite certain now, Zina had conspired with him.
How quickly love turned rancid, its transformation into hate occurring in no more time
than it takes a heart to beat. Now they had turned against him, all his compatriots, the
men and women he'd fought alongside, whom he'd laughed and cried with, prayed to
Allah with, who had the same goals as he did. Chechens! All corrupted now by Stepan
Spalko's power and poisonous charm.
In the end Khalid Murat had been right about everything. He hadn't trusted Spalko; he
wouldn't have followed him into this folly. Once, Arsenov had accused him of being an
old man, of being too cautious, of not understanding the new world that lay before them.
But now he knew what Khalid Murat had surely known: that that new world was nothing
more than a self-serving illusion created by the man who called himself the Shaykh.
Arsenov had believed this pipe dream because he'd wanted to believe it. Spalko had
preyed upon that weakness. But no more! Arsenov vowed. No more! If he was to die
today, it would be on his own terms, not as a sheep to the slaughter of Spalko's making.
He pressed himself against the edge of the doorway, took a deep breath and when he
let it out, he somersaulted past the open doorway. The resulting hail of automatic fire told
him all he needed to know. Rolling, he kept to the concrete floor, wriggling on his
stomach into the opening. He saw the guard, his machine pistol aimed at waist height,
and shot him four times in the chest.
When Bourne saw the two terrorists in HAZMAT suits behind a concrete column,
firing their machine pistols in alternate bursts, his blood ran cold. He and Khan took
cover around the corner of a T-junction and he fired back.
"Spalko's in that room with the bio-weapon," Bourne said. "We've got to get in there
now."
"Not unless those two run out of ammo." Khan was looking around behind them. "Do
you remember the schematics? Remember what's in the ceiling?"
Bourne, continuing to fire, nodded.
"There's an access panel back about twenty feet. I need a boost."
Bourne got off one more burst before retreating with Khan.
"Will you be able to see anything up there?" he asked.
Khan nodded, indicating his miraculous jacket. "I've got a pen light, among other
things, up my sleeve."
Tucking the machine pistol under his arm, Bourne laced his fingers together for Khan
to put his foot in. His bones seemed to crack with the weight and the strained muscles in
his shoulder seemed to catch fire.
Then Khan slid the panel off and had hoisted himself the rest of the way into the access
hatch.

"Time," Bourne said.
"Fifteen seconds," Khan replied, disappearing.
Bourne turned. He counted to ten, then turned the corner, his machine pistol blazing.
But almost immediately he stopped. He could feel his heart pounding painfully against
his ribs. The two Chechens had taken off their HAZMAT suits. They had emerged from
behind the column and now stood facing him. He saw that they were female and that
around their waists were a series of linked packets filled with C4 explosive.
"Good Christ," Bourne said. "Khan! They're wearing suicide belts!"
At that moment they were plunged into darkness. Khan, in the electrical conduit above
his head, had cut the wires.
Arsenov was up and sprinting forward the moment after he fired. He ran into the
station, grabbed the guard before he fell. Two other figures were in the room: Spalko and
Zina. Using the dead guard as a shield, he fired at the target with a machine pistol in each
hand. Zina! But she had squeezed the triggers and even as she staggered back, hit, the
massed fury of the automatic fire blew right through the guard's body.
Arsenov's eyes opened wide as he felt the searing pain in his chest, and then an odd
kind of numbness. The lights winked out and he lay on the floor, the breath rattling in his
blood-filled lungs. As if in a dream, he heard Zina screaming, and he wept for all the
dreams he'd had, for a future that would now never come. With a sigh, life left him as it
had come upon him, in hardship and brutality and pain.
A terrible, deathly silence had descended on the passage. Time seemed to have stopped.
Bourne, his gun aimed into the darkness, heard the soft, shallow breathing of the human
bombs. He could feel their fear as well as their determination. If they sensed him take a
step toward them, if they became aware of Khan moving in the electrical conduit, they
would surely detonate the explosives strapped around their waists.
Then, because he was listening for it, he heard the very faint double tap above his head,
the sound, swiftly diminishing, of Khan moving in the electrical conduit. He knew there
was an access panel more or less where the doorway to the thermal heating station was,
and he had an idea what Khan was going to try. It would require nerves of steel and a
very steady hand from both of them. The AR-15 he carried was short-barreled, but it
made up for any slight inaccuracy with its awesome firepower. It used .223-caliber ammo
which it spit out with a muzzle velocity in excess of 2400 feet per second. He wriggled
silently closer, then, aware of a slight shifting ahead of him in the darkness, he froze. His
heart was in his throat. Had he heard something, a sibilance, a whisper, footsteps? Utter
silence now. He held his breath and concentrated on sighting down the barrel of the AR15.
Where was Spalko? Had he loaded the bio-weapon yet? Would he stay to finish the
mission or would he cut and run? Knowing he had no answers, he put these terrifying
questions aside. Concentrate, he berated himself. Relax now, breathe deeply and evenly
as you move into alpha rhythm, as you become one with the weapon.
He saw it then. Khan's penlight flash, the beam illuminating a woman's face, blinding
her. There was no time to consider or to think. His finger had been curled on the trigger
and now instinct flowed naturally and instantaneously into action. The muzzle flash lit up

the corridor, and he watched the woman's head disintegrate in a welter of blood, bone and
brains.
He was up then, running forward, looking for the other woman. Then the lights blinked
on and he saw the second human bomb, lying beside the other one, her throat slit. An
instant later, Khan dropped down from the open access hatch and together they entered
the thermal heating station.
Moments before, in the darkness that smelled of cordite and blood and death, Spalko
had dropped to his knees, searching blindly for Zina. The darkness had defeated him.
Without light, he was unable to make the delicate connection between the muzzle of the
NX 20 and the valve into the thermal heating system.
His arm extended, he felt along the floor. He hadn't been paying attention to her, wasn't
certain of her position, and in any case, she had moved the moment Arsenov had burst
through the doorway. It had been clever of him to use the human shield, but Zina was
cleverer still and she had killed him. But she was still alive. He had heard her scream.
Now he waited, knowing that the human bombs he had primed would protect him from
whoever was out there. Bourne? Khan? He was ashamed to realize that he was afraid of
the unknown presence in the passage. Whoever it was had seen through his diversion, had
followed his own reasoning regarding the vulnerability of the thermal heating system.
There was a rising panic in him, alleviated for the moment when he heard Zina suck in a
ragged breath. Quickly he crawled through a pool of sticky blood to where she lay.
Her hair was wet and stringy as he kissed her cheek. "Beautiful Zina," he whispered in
her ear. "Powerful Zina."
He felt a kind of spasm pass through her and his heart constricted in fear. "Zina, don't
die. You can't die." Then he tasted the salty wetness running down her cheek and knew
that she was weeping. Her breast rose and fell irregularly with her silent sobs.
"Zina"—he kissed away her tears—"you must be strong, now more than ever before."
He embraced her tenderly and felt her arms slowly come around him.
"This is the moment of our greatest triumph." He drew away and pressed the NX 20
into her embrace. "Yes, yes, I choose you to fire the weapon, to bring the future to
fruition."
She couldn't speak. It was all she could do to keep the breath sawing in and out of her
lungs. Once again he cursed the darkness, for he couldn't see her eyes, couldn't be certain
that he had her. He had to take the chance, however. He took her hands and placed the
left one on the barrel of the bio-diffuser, the right one at the guard on the stock. He placed
her forefinger on the main trigger.
"All you need do is squeeze," he whispered in her ear. "But not yet, not yet. I need
time."
Yes, time was what he needed in order to escape. He was trapped in the darkness, the
one contingency for which he hadn't been prepared. And now he couldn't even take the
NX 20 with him. He'd have to run and run hard, a condition that Schiffer had made clear,
the weapon once loaded was not designed to handle. The payload and its container were
far too fragile.
"Zina, you'll do this, won't you?" He kissed her cheek. "You have enough strength
inside you, I know you do." She was trying to say something, but he put a hand over her

mouth, afraid that his unknown pursuers outside would hear her strangled cry. "I'll be
close by, Zina. Remember that."
Then so slowly and gently that it was imperceptible to her impaired senses, he slithered
away. Turning, at last, from her, he stumbled over Ar-senov's corpse and his HAZMAT
suit ripped. For a moment his new-found terror returned as he imagined himself being
trapped in here when Zina pulled the trigger, the virus seeping into the rent, infecting him.
In his mind's eye, the city of the dead he had created in Nairobi bloomed in all its vivid,
gruesome detail.
Then he'd regained his composure and he stripped off the encumbering suit altogether.
Silent as a cat, he made his way to the doorway, swung out into the passage. At once the
human bombs became aware of him and shifted slightly, tensing.
"La illaha ill Allah," he whispered.
"La illaha ill Allah," they whispered in return.
Then, in the darkness, he stole away.
They both saw it at once, the blunt, ugly snout of Dr. Felix Schiffer's bio-diffuser
pointed at them. Bourne and Khan froze.
"Spalko's gone. There's his HAZMAT suit," Bourne said. "This station has only one
entrance." He thought of the movement he'd detected, the whisper, the sound of furtive
footfalls he thought he'd heard. "He must've slipped out in the darkness."
"I know this one," Khan said. "It's Hasan Arsenov, but this other, the female holding
the weapon, I don't know."
The female terrorist lay half-propped up on the corpse of another terrorist. How she
had managed to drag herself into this position neither of them could say. She was very
badly wounded, possibly fatally, though from this distance it was impossible to say for
sure. She looked at them from a world filled with pain and, Bourne was quite certain,
something else that went beyond mere physical hurt.
Khan had taken a Kalishnikov from one of the human bombs outside and he aimed it
now at the female. "There's no way out for you," he said.
Bourne, who had been watching only her eyes, stepped forward and pushed the
Kalishnikov down. "There's always a way out," he said.
Then he squatted down so that he was at the other's level. Without taking his gaze from
her, he said, "Can you speak? Can you tell me your name?"
For a moment there was only silence, and Bourne had to force himself to keep his gaze
on her face, not to look at her finger curled and tense on the trigger.
At length her lips opened and began to tremble. Her teeth chattered and a tear slipped
free, rolling down her stained cheek.
"What d'you care what her name is?" Khan's voice was filled with contempt. "She's not
human; she's been turned into a machine of destruction."
"Khan, some might say the same of you." Bourne's voice was so gentle it was clear that
what he said wasn't a rebuke, merely a truth that might not have occurred to his son.
He turned his attention back to the terrorist. "It's important that you tell me your name,
isn't it?"

Her lips opened and with a great effort, she said in a voice somewhere between a rattle
and a gurgle, "Zina."
"Well, Zina, we're at the endgame," Bourne said. "There's nothing left now, except
death and life. By the looks of things, it appears as if you've already chosen death. If you
pull the trigger, you'll be sent to heaven and in glory will become a houri. But I wonder
whether that will happen. What is it that you'll be leaving behind? Dead compatriots, at
least one of whom you've shot yourself. And then there's Stepan Spalko. Where has he
gone, I wonder. No matter. What's important is that at the crucial moment, he abandoned
you.
"He's left you to die, Zina, while he's cut and run. So I guess you have to ask yourself
if you pull that trigger, will you go to your glory or will you be cast down, found wanting
by Mounkir and Nekir, the Questioners. Given your life, Zina, when they ask you 'Who is
thy creator? Who is thy Prophet?' will you be able to answer them? Only the righteous
remember, Zina, you know that."
Zina was openly weeping now. But her breast was heaving strangely and Bourne was
afraid that a sudden spasm would cause her to pull the trigger in reflex. If he was going to
reach her, it had to be now.
"If you pull that trigger, if you choose death, you won't be able to answer them. You
know that. You've been abandoned and betrayed, Zina, by those closest to you. And, in
turn, you've betrayed them. But it's not too late. There can be redemption; there's always
a way out."
At the moment Khan realized that Bourne was talking as much to him as he was to
Zina; he experienced a feeling not unlike an electrical shock. This feeling raced through
his body until it sparked both his extremities and his brain. He felt himself stripped naked,
revealed at last, and he was terrified of nothing more or less than himself—his own true
authentic self that he had buried so many years ago in the jungle of Southeast Asia. It was
so long ago that he couldn't remember exactly where or when he'd done it. The truth was
that he was a stranger to himself. He hated his father for leading him to that truth, but he
could no longer deny that he loved him for it, too.
He knelt, then, beside the man he knew to be his father, and putting the Kalishnikov
down where Zina could see it, he extended a hand toward her.
"He's right," Khan said in an altogether different voice from the one he normally used.
"There is a way to make up for your past sins, for the murders you've committed, for the
betrayals to those who've loved you without, perhaps, you even knowing."
He moved forward inch by inch until his hand closed over hers. Slowly and gently he
pried her forefinger away from the trigger. She let go then and allowed him to take the
weapon from her useless embrace.
"Thank you, Zina," Bourne said. "Khan will take care of you now." He rose, and
giving his son's shoulder a brief squeeze, he turned and went swiftly and silently down
the passage after Spalko.

CHAPTER THIRTY

Stepan Spalko sprinted down the bare concrete passage, Bourne's ceramic gun at the
ready. He knew that all the gunfire would bring the security people into the main section
of the hotel. Up ahead, he saw the Saudi security chief, Feyd al-Saoud, and two of his
men. He ducked out of sight. They hadn't seen him yet and he used this element of
surprise, waiting for them to come closer, then shooting them before they had time to
react.
For a breathless moment he stood over the downed men. Feyd al-Saoud groaned and
Spalko shot him at close range in the forehead. The Saudi security chief flopped once and
was still. Quickly Spalko took the ID tags off one of his men, changed into the man's
uniform and got rid of his colored contact lenses. As he did so, his thoughts turned
inexorably to Zina. She had been fearless, true enough, but the ardor of her loyalty to him
had been her fatal flaw. She had protected him from everyone—especially Arsenov.
She'd enjoyed that, he could tell. But it struck him that her true passion was for him. It
was this love, the repugnant weakness of sacrifice, that had driven him to abandon her.
Swift footfalls behind him brought him back to the present, and he hurried on. The
fateful meeting with the Arabs had been a two-edged sword, for while it had provided
him with a ready means of disguise, it had slowed him down, and now as he threw a
glance over his shoulder, he saw a figure in security fatigues and cursed mightily. He felt
like Ahab, who pursued his nemesis until, in an utterly unexpected reversal, his nemesis
had come after him. The man in the security fatigues was Jason Bourne.
Bourne saw Spalko, now in an Arab security uniform, open a door and vanish into a
stairwell. He leaped over the bodies of the men Spalko had just killed and headed after
him. He emerged into the chaos of the lobby.
Just a short time ago, when he and Khan had entered the hotel, this vast glassed-in
space was tense but hushed, almost deserted. Now it was a welter of security personnel
running to and fro. Some were rounding up the hotel personnel, sorting them into groups,
depending on their jobs and where they had just been inside the premises. Others had
already begun the laborious and time-consuming process of questioning the staff. Each
individual had to account for every moment of his whereabouts over the course of the last
two days. Still others were on their way down to the subbasement or were being deployed
by wireless network to other areas of the hotel. Everyone was hustling; no one had time
to question the two men who, one after the other, crossed through the mob scene toward
the front door.
It was ironic to watch Spalko walking among them, blending in, becoming one of them.
Briefly, Bourne considered trying to alert those around him but immediately thought
better of it. Spalko would no doubt call his bluff—it was Bourne who was the
internationally wanted murderer still under a CIA sanction. Spalko, of course, knew this,
being the clever architect of Bourne's dangerous predicament. And as he followed Spalko
out of the front doors, he realized something else. We're both the same now, he thought,
both chameleons employing the same marking in order to keep our true identities from
being revealed to those around us. It was odd and disquieting to realize that at the
moment this international security force was as much his enemy as it was Spalko's.

The moment he was outside, Bourne realized that the hotel was in absolute lockdown.
He watched with fascinated dread as Spalko boldly made his way to the security services
car park. Although it was within the limits of the lockdown cordon, it was deserted, as
even security personnel weren't allowed in or out.
Bourne went after him but almost immediately lost him in the ranks of vehicles. He
broke into a run. There was a shout from behind him. He pulled open the door of the first
vehicle he came to—an American Jeep. Yanking out the plastic panel on the bottom of
the steering column, he fumbled for the wires. Just then another engine fired up and he
saw Spalko in the car he'd stolen, wheeling out of the car park.
There were more shouts now and the pounding of boots against pavement. Several
shots were fired. Bourne, concentrating on what needed to be done, got the wires stripped
and braided together. The Jeep's engine coughed to life, and he put it hi gear. Then with a
hard squeal of tires, he turned out of the car park and accelerated through the security
checkpoint.
The night was moonless but, then again, it wasn't really night. An insipid darkness lay
over Reykjavik as the sun, hanging just below the horizon, turned the sky the color of an
oystershell. As Bourne followed Spalko's twists and turns through the city, he realized
that Spalko was heading south.
This was something of a surprise, for he'd expected Spalko to make for the airport.
Surely he had an escape plan and just as surely it involved an aircraft. But the more
Bourne thought about it, the less surprised he was. He was getting to know his adversary
better now. Already he understood that Spalko never took the logical way in or out of a
situation. His mind was unique, involved as it was in puzzle-logic. He was a man of
feints and twists, someone who liked to trap his opponent rather than kill him outright.
So. Keflavik was out. Too obvious and, as Spalko would undoubtedly have foreseen,
too well guarded for him to use as an escape route. Bourne oriented himself to the map
he'd studied on Oszkar's laptop. What lay south of the city? Hafnarfjordur, a fishing
village too small to land the kind of aircraft Spalko would use. The coast! They were on
an island, after all. Spalko was going to escape via boat.
At this time of night there was little traffic, especially after they left the city behind
them. The roads became narrower, winding through the hillsides that fronted the
landward side of the sea cliffs. As Spalko's car went around a particularly sharp curve,
Bourne dropped back. Turning off his headlights, he accelerated around the turn. He
could see Spalko's vehicle up ahead, but he hoped that Spalko, peering into his rear-view
mirror, wouldn't be able to see him. It was a risk, losing sight of the car every time they
went around a turn, but Bourne didn't see that he had any alternative. He had to make
Spalko believe he'd lost his pursuer.
The utter lack of trees lent the landscape a certain gravity and, with the blue ice
mountains as backdrop, a sense of eternal winter as well, made all the more eerie by the
intermittent swaths of verdant green. The sky was immense and, in the long false-dawn,
filled with the black shapes of shore-birds, soaring and swooping. Seeing them, Bourne
felt a certain freedom from his entombment in the death-laden bowels of the hotel.
Despite the chill, he rolled down the windows and breathed deeply of the fresh salt-laced

air. A sweet smell rose to his nostrils as he flashed past the rolling, flower-dotted carpet
of a meadow.
The road narrowed further as it turned toward the sea. Bourne descended through a
lushly foliated glen and then zoomed around another curve. The road steepened in its
switchback descent of the cliff face. He saw Spalko, then lost him again as another curve
loomed. He made the turn and saw the North Atlantic low and spangled dully in the slategray dawn.
Spalko's car went around another turn and Bourne followed on. The next turn was so
close that the car was already out of sight, and despite the added risk, Bourne pushed the
Jeep faster.
He had already committed to the turn when he heard the sound. It was soft and familiar
above the flutter of the wind, the noise his ceramic gun made when fired. His front
nearside tire blew and he slewed around. He caught a glimpse of Spalko, gun in hand,
running to where he'd left his car. Then his view changed, and he was too busy trying to
get the Jeep under control as it skidded perilously close to the seaside edge of the road.
He downshifted into neutral, but it wasn't enough. He needed to turn off the ignition,
but without the key that was impossible. The rear tires slipped off the road. Bourne
unbuckled himself and held on as the Jeep spun off the cliff. It seemed to float, turning
over twice. The brash, unmistakable odor of overheated metal came to him, along with
the acrid stench of rubber or plastic burning.
He leaped just before the Jeep hit, rolling away as the vehicle bounced off an
outcropping of rock and burst open. Flames shot up into the air, and by their light he saw
in the cove just below him the fishing boat, nosing in toward the shore.
Spalko drove like a maniac down the road to the dead end at the inner edge of the cove.
Throwing a glance back at the flaming Jeep, he said to himself, To hell with Jason
Bourne. He's dead now. But not, unfortunately, soon forgotten. It was Bourne who had
foiled him, and now he had neither the NX 20 nor the Chechens as cat's-paws. So many
months of careful planning come to nothing!
He got out of the car and walked across what remained of the wrack-strewn shingle. A
rowboat was coming for him, even though it was high tide and the fishing boat was very
close to shore. He'd called the captain the moment he'd successfully run the hotel's
security checkpoint. Only a skeleton crew of the captain and a mate were onboard. He
climbed in as the captain nosed the rowboat onto the shingle, then the mate pushed off
with his oar.
Spalko was fuming and not a word was said on the short, unpleasant trip back to the
fishing boat. When he was aboard, Spalko said, "Make ready to leave, Captain."
"Begging you pardon, sir," the captain replied, "but what about the rest of the crew?"
Spalko grabbed the captain by his shirtfront. "I gave you an order, Captain. I expect
you to carry it out."
"Aye, aye, sir," the captain grumbled with an evil glint in his eye. "But with only the
two of us to crew, it'll take a little longer to get under way."
"You'd damn well better get to it then," Spalko told him, as he headed below.

The water was cold as ice, black as the subbasement of the hotel. Bourne knew that he
needed to get onboard the fishing boat as quickly as possible. Thirty seconds after he'd
pushed out from the shingle, his fingers and toes had started to go numb; thirty seconds
after that, he couldn't feel them at all.
The two minutes it took him to reach the boat seemed like the longest in his life. He
reached up for an oiled hawser and hauled himself out of the sea. He shivered in the wind,
moving hand over hand up the line.
As he went, he experienced an eerie dislocation. With the scent of the sea in his
nostrils, the feel of the brine drying on his skin, it seemed to him as if he wasn't in Iceland
at all but in Marseilles, that he wasn't climbing onto a fishing boat in pursuit of Stepan
Spalko but was clandestinely boarding a pleasure yacht on his way to execute the
international assassin for hire, Carlos. For it was in Marseilles that the nightmare had
begun, where the pitched battle with Carlos had ended with him being flung overboard,
the shock of being shot and almost drowned robbing him of his memory, of his very life.
As he lifted himself over the gunwale onto the deck of the fishing boat, he felt a stab of
fear that was almost paralyzing in its intensity. It was in this very same situation that he'd
failed. He felt abruptly exposed, as if he wore this failure on his sleeve. He almost
faltered then, but into his mind sprang the image of Khan, and he remembered what he'd
said to him when they'd first met in that tension-filled setting. "Who are you?" Because it
occurred to him now that Khan didn't know, and if Bourne wasn't around to help him find
out who he was, he'd have no one. He thought of Khan, on his knees in the thermal
heating station, and it seemed to him that it wasn't only the Kalishnikov he'd let go of but
also, possibly, something of his own inner rage.
Bourne, taking a deep breath, settled his mind on what was before him and crept along
the deck. The captain and his mate were busy in the wheel-house and he encountered
little difficulty in rendering them unconscious. There was plenty of rope around and he
was in the process of binding their wrists behind their backs when Spalko said from
behind him, "I think you'd better find a bit of rope for yourself."
Bourne was crouched down. The two seamen lay on their sides, back to back. Without
showing anything to Spalko, Bourne slipped out his switchblade. Immediately, he knew
he'd made a fatal mistake. The mate had his back to him, but the captain did not and saw
very clearly that he was now armed. His eyes looked into Bourne's but, curiously, he
made no sound or movement that would alert Spalko. Instead, he closed his eyes as if in
sleep.
"Stand up and turn around," Spalko ordered.
Bourne did as he was told, keeping his right hand hidden behind the outer edge of his
thigh. Spalko, in freshly pressed jeans and a black cable-knit turtleneck sweater, stood
spread-legged on the deck, Bourne's ceramic gun in his hand. And again Bourne was
subjected to the strange sense of dislocation. As with Carlos years ago, Spalko now had
the drop on him. All that remained was for Spalko to pull the trigger, for Bourne to be hit
and cast into the water. This time, however, in the bone-chilling North Atlantic, there
would be no rescue as there had been in the mild Mediterranean waters. He would
quickly freeze and drown.
"You simply will not die, will you, Mr. Bourne?"

Bourne dove at Spalko, the switchblade snapping open. Spalko, startled, squeezed the
trigger far too late. The bullet sang out over the water as the blade buried itself in his side.
He grunted, clubbed the barrel of the gun down onto Bourne's cheek. Blood spurted from
both of them. Spalko's left knee buckled, but Bourne crashed to the deck.
Spalko, remembering, kicked him viciously in his cracked ribs, rendering Bourne
nearly unconscious. He pulled the switchblade from his side, threw it into the water. Then
he bent and dragged Bourne to the gunwale. As Bourne began to stir, Spalko hit him with
heel of his hand. Then he hauled him more or less upright and bent him over the side.
Bourne was phasing in and out of consciousness, but the sharp tang of the icy black
water brought him around enough to know that he was on the brink of annihilation. It was
happening again, just as it had so many years ago. He was in so much pain that he could
barely draw breath, but there was life to think of—his life now, not the one that had been
taken away from him. He wouldn't let himself be robbed again.
As Spalko exerted himself to heave him over the side, Bourne kicked out with all his
might. With a sickening snap, the sole of his shoe connected with Spalko's jaw. Spalko,
grabbing his broken jaw, staggered backward, and Bourne ran at him. Spalko had no time
to use the gun; Bourne was already inside his guard. He slammed the butt down on
Bourne's shoulder, and Bourne staggered as more pain flashed through him.
Then he'd reached up, digging his fingers into the broken bones of Spalko's jaw.
Spalko screamed and Bourne wrenched the gun from his grip. He jammed the muzzle
underneath Spalko's chin and pulled the trigger.
The sound did not amount to much, but the force of the percussion lifted Spalko bodily
off the deck and pitched him over the side. He went into the sea headfirst.
For a moment, as Bourne looked on, he floated facedown, rocked back and forth by the
restless waves. Then he went under as if drawn by something huge and immensely potent
beneath the sea.

CHAPTER THIRTY-ONE
Martin Lindros spent twenty minutes on the phone with Ethan Hearn. Hearn had much
information about the famous Stepan Spalko, all of it such a stunning revelation it took
Lindros some time to absorb and accept. In the end, no item was of more interest to him
than the one that showed an electronic transfer from one of Spalko's many shell
companies in Budapest to buy a gun from a certain illegal Russian-run company
operating out of Virginia until Detective Harris had shut them down.
An hour later he had two hard copies printed out from the electronic files Hearn had emailed him. He got into his car and headed over to the DCI's town house. Overnight, the
Old Man had been stricken with the flu. It must be bad, Lindros thought now, for him to
have left the office at all during the crisis at the summit.
His driver stopped the staff car at the high iron gates, leaned out the open window, and
pressed the intercom. In the ensuing silence he began to wonder if the Old Man, feeling
better, had summarily taken himself back to the office without informing anyone.

Then the querulous voice crackled over the intercom, the driver announced Lindros,
and a moment later, the gates swung soundlessly open. The driver pulled the car up and
Lindros got out. He rapped on the door with the brass knocker, and when it opened, he
saw the DCI, his face wrinkled and his hair disheveled from lying on a pillow. He was
wearing striped pajamas over which he'd wrapped a heavy-looking bathrobe. On his bony
feet were carpet slippers.
"Come in, Martin. Come in." He turned and left the door open without waiting for
Lindros to cross the threshold. Lindros entered, closed the door behind him. The DCI had
padded into the study, which was off to the left. There were no lights on; there appeared
to be none on in the house at all.
He went into the study, a masculine space with hunter green walls, a cream ceiling, and
oversize leather chairs and sofa scattered about. A TV, set into a wall of built-in
bookcases, was off. Every other time Lindros had been in this room it had been on, tuned
to CNN, either with or without the sound.
The Old Man sat heavily down in his favorite chair. The side table at his right elbow
was crammed with a large box of tissues and bottles of aspirin, Tylenol Cold & Sinus,
NyQuil, Vicks VapoRub, Coricidin, DayQuil, and Robitussin DM cough syrup.
"What is this, sir?" Lindros said, indicating the small drugstore.
"I didn't know what I'd need," The DCI said, "so I just took everything out of the
medicine chest."
Then Lindros saw the bottle of bourbon and the old-fashioned glass, and he frowned.
"Sir, what's going on?" He craned his neck to see out the open doorway of the study.
"Where's Madeleine?"
"Ah, Madeleine." The Old Man picked up his whiskey glass and slugged some down.
"Madeleine has gone to her sister's in Phoenix."
"And left you on your own?" Lindros reached over and turned on a standing lamp, and
the DCI blinked owlishly at him. "When will she be back, sir?"
"Hmmm." The DCI said, as if considering his deputy's words. "Well, the thing of it is,
Martin, I don't know when she's coming back."
"Sir?" Lindros said with some alarm.
"She's left me. At least that's what I think has happened." The DCI's gaze seemed fixed
as he drained his glass of bourbon. He pursed his shining lips as if perplexed. "How does
one know these things, really?"
"Haven't the two of you talked?"
"Talked?" The DCI's gaze snapped back into focus. He looked at Lindros for a moment.
"No. We haven't spoken about it at all."
"Then how do you know?"
"You think I'm making it up, tempest in a rotunda, eh?" The DCI's eyes came alive for
an instant and all at once his voice was clotted with barely suppressed emotion. "But
there are things of hers that're gone, you see— personal things, intimate things. The
house is goddamned empty without them."
Lindros sat down. "Sir, you have my sympathy, but I have something—"

"Maybe, Martin, she never loved me." The Old Man reached for the bottle. "But how is
one to know such a mysterious thing?"
Lindros learned forward, gently took the bourbon from his commander. The DCI didn't
seem surprised. "I'll work on it for you, sir, if you'd like."
The DCI nodded vaguely. "All right."
Lindros put the bottle aside. "But for now we have another pressing matter to discuss."
He set the file he'd gotten from Ethan Hearn down on the Old Man's side table.
"What is that? I can't read anything now, Martin."
"Then I'll tell you," Lindros said. When he was done, there was a silence that seemed
to echo throughout the house.
After a time the Old Man looked at his deputy with watery eyes. "Why'd he do it,
Martin? Why did Alex break every rule and steal one of our own people?"
"I think he'd gotten a hint of what was coming, sir. He was frightened of Spalko. As it
turned out, with very good reason."
The Old Man sighed and put his head back. "So it wasn't treason, after all."
"No, sir."
"Thank God."
Lindros cleared his throat. "Sir, you must rescind the Bourne sanction at once, and
someone's going to have to debrief him."
"Yes, of course. I think you're best equipped to do that, Martin."
"Yes, sir." Lindros stood.
"Where are you going?" The querulousness had returned to the Old Man's voice.
"To the Virginia State Police Commissioner. I have another copy of that file to drop
into his lap. I'm going to insist that Detective Harris be reinstated, with a commendation
from us. And as for the National Security Advisor herself... ?"
The DCI took up the file and stroked it lightly. With this bit of animation, some color
returned to his face. "Give me overnight, Martin." Slowly, the old glint was returning to
his eyes. "I'll think of something deliciously suitable." He laughed, the first time he'd
done so, it seemed, in ages. " 'Let the punishment fit the crime,' eh?"
Khan was with Zina to the end. He'd hidden the NX 20 and its horribly lethal payload.
As far as the security people who were swarming all over the thermal heating station
were concerned, he was a hero. They knew nothing about the bio-weapon. They knew
nothing about him.
It was a curious time for Khan. He held the hand of a dying young woman who
couldn't speak, who could barely breathe, and yet who quite clearly didn't want to let him
go. Perhaps it was simply that, in the end, she didn't want to die.
After Hull and Karpov realized that she was on the verge of dying and couldn't provide
them with information, they lost interest and so they left her alone with Khan. And he, so
inured to death, experienced something wholly unexpected. Each breath she took, labored
and painful, was a lifetime. He saw this in her eyes which, like her hand, would not let

him go. She was drowning in the silence, sinking down into darkness. He couldn't let that
happen.
Unbidden, his own pain was brought to the surface by hers, and he spoke to her of his
life: of his abandonment, his imprisonment by the Vietnamese gunrunner, the religious
conversion forced on him by the missionary, the political brainwashing by his Khmer
Rouge interlocutor.
And then, most painful of all, was wrenched out of him his feelings about Lee-Lee. "I
had a sister," he said in a thin, reedy voice. "She would've been about your age had she
lived. She was two years younger than me, looked up to me, and I—I was her protector. I
wanted so much to keep her safe, not only because my parents said I should but because I
needed to. My father was away a lot. When we were off playing, who would protect her
if not me?" Unaccountably, his eyes felt hot and his vision was blurred. Suffused with
shame, he was about to turn away, but he saw something in Zina's eyes, a fierce
compassion that served as a lifeline for him, and his shame vanished. He continued then,
connected to her on an even more intimate level. "But, in the end, I failed Lee-Lee. My
sister was killed along with my mother. I should've been too, but I survived." His hand
found its way to the carved stone Buddha, gaining strength from it as he had done so
many times before. "For such a long time, I used to wonder, what use was my survival? I
had failed her."
When Zina's lips parted slightly, he saw that her teeth were bloody. Her hand, which
he held so tightly, squeezed his and he knew that she wanted him to go on. He was not
only freeing her from her own agony but he was freeing himself from his own. And the
most curious thing was that it worked. Though she couldn't speak, though she was slowly
dying, still her brain functioned. She heard what he said, and by her expression, he knew
that it meant something to her—he knew that she was transported and that she understood.
"Zina," he said, "in a way, we're kindred spirits. I see myself in you— alienated,
abandoned, utterly alone. I know this won't make much sense to you, but my own guilt at
my failure to protect my sister made me hate my father beyond reason. All I could see
was his abandonment of us—of me." And then, in a moment of astonishing revelation, he
realized that he was looking through a glass darkly, that the only way he recognized
himself in her was that he had changed. She was, in fact, the way he used to be. It was far
easier to plan revenge on his father than to face the full brunt of his own guilt. It was
from this knowledge that his desire to help her sprang. He fervently wished that he could
rescue her from death.
But he, of all people, understood with uncanny intimacy the coming of death. Its tread,
once heard, could not be stopped, even by him. And when the time came, when he heard
the tread and saw death's proximity in her eyes, he leaned over and, without being aware
of it, smiled down at her reassuringly.
Picking up where Bourne, his father, had left off, he said, "Remember what to tell the
Questioners, Zina. 'My God is Allah, my prophet Mohammad, my religion Islam, and my
kibla the Holy Kaaba.'" There seemed so much that she wanted to tell him and could not.
"You are righteous, Zina. They will welcome you to glory."
Her eyes nickered once and then, like a flame, the life that animated them was
extinguished.

Jamie Hull was waiting for Bourne when he returned to the Oskjuhlid Hotel. It had
taken Bourne some time to get back there. Twice he was on the verge of passing out and
was obliged to turn off the road, sitting with his forehead pressed against the steering
wheel, he was in terrible pain, weary beyond thought, still, his will to see Khan again
goaded him on. He did not care about security; he didn't care about anything now but
being with his son.
At the hotel, after Bourne had briefly recounted Stepan Spalko's role in the assault on
the hotel, Hull insisted on taking him to a medic to see to his fresh wounds.
"Spalko's worldwide reputation is such that even after we recover the body and release
the evidence, there will be those who will refuse to believe it," Hull responded.
The emergency medic's rooms were filled with casualties lying on hastily erected cots.
The more seriously wounded had been driven off by ambulance to the hospital. Then
there were the dead, of whom no one yet wished to speak.
"We know your part in this, and I must say we're all grateful," Hull said, as he sat
beside Bourne. "The president wants to speak with you, of course, but that will come
later."
The medic arrived and started to stitch up Bourne's lacerated cheek. "This won't heal
pretty," she said. "You might want to consult a plastic surgeon."
"It won't be my first scar," Bourne said. "So I see," she said dryly.
"One thing we found troubling was the presence of HAZMAT suits," Hull continued.
"We found no sign of a biological or chemical agent. Did you?"
Bourne had to think fast. He'd left Khan alone with Zina and the bio-weapon. A sudden
stab of fear struck him. "No. We were as surprised as you were. But, afterward, there was
no one left alive to ask."
Hull nodded, and when the medic was finished, he helped Bourne up and out into the
corridor. "I know you'd like nothing better than a hot shower and a change of clothes, but
it's important that I debrief you immediately." He smiled reassuringly. "It's a matter of
national security. My hands are tied. But at least we can do it in a civilized manner over a
hot meal, okay?"
Without another word, he delivered a short, sharp kidney punch that dropped Bourne
to his knees. As Bourne gasped for breath, Hull drew back his other hand. In it was a
push-dagger, the stubby leaflike blade that emerged from between his second and third
fingers dark with a substance that was doubtless poisonous.
As he was about to drive it into Bourne's neck, a shot sounded in the corridor. Bourne,
released from Hull's grip, slumped against the wall. Turning his head, he took everything
in: Hull lying dead on the maroon carpet, the poisoned push-dagger in his hand, and
hurrying up on his slightly bandy legs, Boris Illyich Karpov, director of the FSB's Alpha
Unit, a silenced pistol in his hand.
"I must admit," Karpov said in Russian, as he helped Bourne to his feet, "I always
harbored a secret desire to kill a CIA agent."
"Christ, thanks," Bourne gasped in the same language.

"This was a pleasure, believe me." Karpov stared down at Hull. "The CIA sanction
against you has been rescinded, not that it mattered to him. It seems that you still have
enemies inside your own Agency."
Bourne took several deep breaths, in itself a terribly painful proposition. He waited for
his mind to clear sufficiently. "Karpov, how do I know you?"
The Russian let loose with a booming laugh. "Gospadin Bourne, I see the rumors about
your memory are true." He put his arm around Bourne's waist, half supporting him. "Do
you remember—? No, of course you don't. Well, the truth is, we've met several times.
The last time, you saved my life, in fact." He laughed again at Bourne's bewildered
expression. "It's a fine tale, my friend. A suitable story to tell over a bottle of vodka. Or
maybe two, eh? After a night like this, who knows?"
"I'd be grateful for some vodka," Bourne acknowledged, "but there's someone I need to
find first."
"Come," Karpov said, "I'll contact my men to clean up this garbage and we'll do
together whatever needs to be done." He grinned hugely, dissolving the brutality of his
features. "You stink like a week-old fish, you know that? But what the hell, I'm used to
all sorts of foul odors!" He laughed again. "What a pleasure to see you again! One doesn't
make friends easily, I've discovered, especially in our line of work. And so we must
celebrate this event, this reunion, no?"
"Absolutely."
"And who must you need to find, my good friend Jason Bourne, that you cannot take a
hot shower and a well-deserved rest first?"
"A young man named Khan. You've met him, I assume."
"Indeed," Karpov said as he led Bourne down another corridor. "A most remarkable
young man. D'you know he never left the dying Chechen's side? And she, for her part,
never let go of his hand until the end." He shook his head. "Most extraordinary."
He pursed his ruby lips. "Not that she deserved his attention. What was she, a murderer,
a destroyer? You only have to see what they were attempting here to understand what
kind of a monster she was."
"And yet," Bourne said, "she needed to hold his hand."
"How he put up with it I'll never know."
"Perhaps he needed something from her, as well." Bourne gave him a look. "Still think
she was a monster?"
"Oh, yes," Karpov said, "but then the Chechens have trained me to think that way."
"Nothing changes, does it?" Bourne said.
"Not until we wipe them out." Karpov gave him a sideways glance. "Listen, my
idealistic friend, they have said about us what other terrorists have said about you
Americans, 'God has declared war on you.' We have learned from bitter experience to
take such pronouncements seriously."
As it happened, Karpov knew just where Khan was—in the main restaurant, which was,
after a fashion, up and running again with a severely limited menu.
"Spalko's dead," Bourne said to cover the rush of feeling he felt when he saw Khan.

Khan put down his hamburger and studied the stitches on Bourne's swollen cheek.
"Are you hurt?"
"More than I already am?" Bourne winced as he sat down. "It's only minor."
Khan nodded but didn't take his eyes off Bourne.
Karpov, sitting down beside Bourne, called out to a passing waiter for a bottle of
vodka. "Russian," he said sharply, "not that Polish swill. And bring with it large glasses.
We're real men here, a Russian and heroes who are almost as good as Russians!" Then he
returned his attention to his companions. "All right, what am I missing?" he said cannily.
"Nothing," Khan and Bourne said together.
"Is that so?" The Russian agent's caterpillar eyebrows lifted. "Well, then, there's
nothing left but to drink. In vino, veritas. In wine, there is truth, so the ancient Romans
believed. And who should disbelieve them? They were damn fine soldiers, the Romans,
and they had great generals, but they would've been even better if they'd drunk vodka
instead of wine!" He laughed raucously until the other two had no choice but to join in.
The vodka came then, along with water glasses. Karpov waved the waiter away.
"One must open the first bottle oneself," he said. "It's tradition."
"Bullshit," Bourne said, turning to Khan. "It's a habit from the old days when Russian
vodka was so poorly refined there was often fuel oil in it."
"Don't listen to him." Karpov pursed his lips, but there was a twinkle in his eye. He
filled their glasses and very formally placed them in front of them. "To share a bottle of
fine Russian vodka is the very definition of friendship, fuel oil notwithstanding. Because
over that bottle of fine Russian vodka we talk of old times, of comrades and enemies who
have passed."
He lifted up his glass and they followed suit.
"Na Sdarovye!" he cried, taking an enormous swallow.
"Na Sdarovye!" they echoed, following suit.
Bourne's eyes watered. The vodka burned all the way down, but in a moment a warmth
suffused his stomach, reaching out its fingers to assuage the constant pain he'd been in.
Karpov hunkered down, his face slightly flushed from both the fiery liquor and the
simple pleasure of being with friends. "Now we'll get drunk and tell all our secrets. We'll
learn what it means to be friends."
He took another huge swallow and said, "I'll begin. Here's my first secret. I know who
you are, Khan. Though there's never been a photo taken of you, I know you." He put his
finger beside his nose. "I haven't been in the field for twenty years without honing my
sixth sense. And knowing this, I steered you away from Hull, who, had he suspected,
would surely have arrested you, hero status or no."
Khan shifted slightly. "Why would you do that?"
"Oho, now you would kill me? Here at this amiable table? You think that I kept you
isolated for myself? Did I not say that we were friends!" He shook his head. "You've
much to learn about friendship, my young friend." He leaned forward. "I kept you safe
because of Jason Bourne, who always works alone. You were with him, therefore I knew
you were important to him."
He took another slug of vodka and pointed at Bourne. "Your turn, my friend."

Bourne stared down into his vodka. He was acutely aware of Khan's scrutiny. He knew
what secret he wanted to divulge, but he was afraid that if he did, Khan would get up and
walk away. But a truth was what he needed to tell them. He looked up finally.
"In the end, when I was with Spalko, I almost faltered. Spalko came close to killing me,
but the truth is ... the truth is ..."
"It will be better for you to say it, yes," Karpov urged.
Bourne took the vodka into his mouth, swallowed the liquid courage down and turned
to his son. "I thought of you. I thought if I failed now, if I allowed Spalko to kill me, I
wouldn't come back. I couldn't abandon you; I couldn't allow that to happen."
"Good!" Karpov banged his glass on the table. He pointed at Khan. "Now you, my
young friend."
In the ensuing silence Bourne felt as if his heart was in danger of stopping. Blood
pounded in his head and all the pain of his many wounds, so briefly anesthetized, came
flooding back.
"Well," Karpov said, "has the cat got your tongue? Your friends have given themselves
up to you, and now they're waiting."
Khan looked straight at the Russian and said, "Boris Illyich Karpov, I'd like to formally
introduce myself. My name is Joshua. I'm Jason Bourne's son."
Many hours and liters of vodka later, Bourne and Khan stood together in the
subbasement of the Oskjuhlid Hotel. It was musty down there and cold, but all they could
smell were vodka fumes. There were bloodstains everywhere.
"I suppose you're wondering what happened to the NX 20," Khan said.
Bourne nodded. "Hull was suspicious of the HAZMAT suits. He said they didn't find
any evidence of biological or chemical weapons."
"I hid it," Khan said. "I was waiting for you to come back so that we could destroy it
together."
Bourne hesitated for a moment. "You had faith I'd come back."
Khan turned and looked at his father. "It seems that I've newly acquired my faith."
"Or had it restored."
"Don't tell me—"
"I know, I know, I have no business telling you what you think." Bourne ducked his
head. "Some acquisitions take more time than others."
Khan moved to where he'd hidden the NX 20, inside a crumbly niche behind a broken
block of concrete obscured from view by one of the huge pipes in the thermal power
station. "I had to leave Zina for a moment to do it," he said, "but it couldn't be helped."
He held it with understandable respect as he handed it over to Bourne. He went and took
a small metal box out of the niche. "The vial with the payload is in here."
"We need a fire," Bourne said, thinking of the legend he'd read on Dr. Side's computer.
"Heat will render the payload inert."

The vast hotel kitchen was spotless. Its gleaming stainless-steel surfaces seemed even
colder with the absence of personnel. Bourne had moved the skeleton staff out for the
time being while he and Khan went over to the huge floor-to-ceiling ovens. They were
gas-powered, and Bourne turned them up to the highest level. At once fierce flames shot
through the firebrick-lined interior. In less than a minute, it was too hot even to get close
to.
They donned HAZMAT suits, broke down the weapon and each one threw one half
into the flames. The vial went next.
"It's like a Viking funeral pyre," Bourne said as he watched the NX 20 collapse in on
itself. He closed the door and they took off the suits.
Turning to his son, he said, "I've phoned Marie, but I haven't told her about you yet. I
was waiting—"
"I'm not going back with you," Khan said.
Bourne chose his next words with great care. "That would not be my choice."
"I know," Khan said. "But I think there was a very good reason you didn't tell your
wife about me."
In the silence that abruptly engulfed them, Bourne was gripped by a terrible sorrow. He
wanted to look away, to hide what had rushed to his face, but he could not. He was
through hiding his emotions from his son and from himself.
"You have Marie, two small children," Khan said. "This is the new life David Webb
has made for himself and I'm not a part of it."
Bourne had learned many things in the few days since the first bullet sang its warning
song past his ear on campus, not the least of which was when to keep his mouth shut
around his son. He'd made up his mind and that was it. Trying to talk him out of his
decision would be useless. Worse, it would reawaken the still-latent anger he would carry
around with him for some time. An emotion so toxic, so deep-seated, it couldn't be
expunged in a matter of days, weeks or even months.
Bourne understood that Khan had made a wise decision. There was still too much pain,
the wound still raw, though the bleeding, at least, had been stopped. And as Khan had
astutely pointed out, he knew deep down Khan's entry into the life that David Webb had
fashioned for himself made no sense at all. Khan didn't belong there.
"Perhaps not now, perhaps not ever. But no matter how you feel about me, I want you
to know that you have a brother and a sister who deserve to know you and have an older
brother in their life. I hope there will come a time when that will happen—for all our
sakes."
They walked together to the door and Bourne was very much aware that it was for the
last time for many months to come. But not forever, no. This, at least, he had to make
known to his son.
He moved forward and took Khan into his embrace. They stood together in silence.
Bourne could hear the hiss of the gas jets. Inside the ovens, the fire continued to burn
fiercely, annihilating the terrible threat to them all.
Reluctantly, he let Khan go, and for the briefest moment, as he stared into his son's
eyes, he saw him as he had been, as a little boy in Phnom Penh with the blazing Asian

sun on his face and, in the dappled shadows of the palms just beyond, Dao watching,
smiling at them both.
"I'm also Jason Bourne," he said. "That's something you should never forget."

Epilogue
When the President of the United States personally opened the double walnut doors to
his West Wing study, the DCI felt as if he was being readmitted to the precincts of
heaven after cooling his heels in the seventh circle of hell.
The DCI was still suffering from the godawful malady, but with the telephone
summons, he'd managed to drag himself out of his leather chair, had showered, shaved
and dressed. He had been expecting the call. In fact, after he had his "Eyes Only" report
delivered to the president, including all the detailed evidence compiled by Martin Lindros
and Detective Harris he'd been mentally waiting for the call. And yet he'd waited in his
robe and pajamas, sunk in his chair, listening to the oppressive silence of the house as if,
within that void, he could discern the ghost of his wife's voice.
Now, as the president ushered him into the royal blue and gold corner office, he felt the
desolation of his house even more keenly. Here was his life—the life he'd painstakingly
built for himself over decades of faithful service and convoluted manipulation—here is
where he understood the rules and knew how to play them, here and nowhere else.
"Good of you to come," the president said with his high-wattage smile. "It's been too
long."
"Thank you, sir," the DCI said. "I was thinking the same thing."
"Take a seat." The president waved him to an upholstered wing-back chair. He was
dressed in an impeccably tailored dark-blue suit, white shirt and a red tie with blue polka
dots. His cheeks were slightly flushed, as if he'd just come in from running wind sprints.
"Coffee?"
"I think I will. Thank you, sir."
At that moment, as if in response to an unheard summons, one of the presidential aides
came in with a chased silver tray on which sat an ornate coffee pot and china cups in their
delicate saucers. With a little thrill of pleasure, the DCI noted that there were only two
cups.
"The NSA will be along presently," the president said, taking a seat opposite the DCI.
The flush, the DCI could see now, wasn't from physical exertion but from the full
ripening of his power. "But before that, I wanted to thank you personally for your good
work these past several days."
The aide handed them their coffee and left, closing the heavy door softly behind him.
"I shudder to think of the dire consequences suffered by the civilized world were it not
for your man Bourne."
"Thank you, sir. We never fully believed that he'd murdered Alex Conklin and Dr.
Panov," the DCI said with an earnest and thoroughly hypocritical candor, "but we were

presented with certain evidence—trumped-up, as it turned out—and we were forced to
act on it."
"Of course—I understand." The president dropped two cubes of sugar into his cup and
stirred thoughtfully. "All's well that ends well, though in our world—as opposed to
Shakespeare's—there are consequences to every action." He sipped his coffee.
"Nevertheless, despite the bloodbath, the summit, as you know, went on as scheduled.
And it was an unqualified success. In fact, the threat served to bring us more firmly
together. All the heads of state—even, thank God, Aleksandr Yevtushenko—could see
clearly the fate the world faced if we didn't put aside our own myopic viewpoints and
agree to work together. We now have signed, sealed and delivered a practical framework
for going forward in a united front against terrorism. Already, the Secretary of State is on
his way to the Middle East to begin the next round of talks. Quite an opening salvo across
our enemies' bows."
And your reelection is assured, the DCI thought. Not to mention the legacy of your
presidency.
At the discreet sound of the intercom, the president excused himself, rose and crossed
to his desk. He listened for a moment, then looked up. His penetrating gaze rested on the
DCI. "I've allowed myself to be cut off from someone who could have provided
measured and valuable advice. Rest assured I won't allow that to happen again."
Clearly, the president didn't expect him to respond because he was already saying into
the intercom, "Send her in."
The DCI, as emotionally vulnerable as he'd ever been, took a moment to collect
himself. He looked about the spacious high-ceilinged room with its cream walls, royal
blue carpet, dentiled molding and solid, comfortable furniture. Large oil portraits of
several Republican presidents hung above a matching pair of Chippendale cherrywood
sideboards. An American flag stood half-furled in a corner. Outside the windows, under a
downy white haze, was an expanse of closely mowed lawn above which a cherry tree
spread its arching branches. Clusters of pale pink blossoms shivered like bells in the
spring breeze.
The door opened and Roberta Alonzo-Ortiz was ushered in. The DCI noted with relish
that the president didn't budge from his position behind his desk. He stood still, facing the
NSA, and, quite pointedly, didn't ask her to sit down. The NSA was wearing a severely
cut black suit, steel-gray silk blouse and practical low-heeled pumps. She appeared ready
to attend a funeral, which, the DCI thought with no little glee, was entirely appropriate.
She registered a split-instant's surprise at the DCI's presence. A last spark of enmity
glowed in her eyes before they turned inward and she drew her face into a rigid mask.
Her complexion appeared oddly mottled, as if in reaction to the obvious effort of stifling
her emotions. She didn't address him or otherwise acknowledge his presence.
"Ms. Alonzo-Ortiz, I want you to understand some things so that you can put the
events of the last several days into some kind of perspective," the president began in a
sonorous voice that brooked no interruption. "While I acceded to the Bourne sanction, I
did so strictly on advice from you. I also agreed when you petitioned me for a quick
resolution to the murders of Alex Conklin and Morris Panov and, foolishly, followed
your judgment in condemning Detective Harry Harris of the Virginia State Police for the
debacle beneath Washington Circle.

"All I can say is that I'm profoundly grateful that the sanction wasn't in the end carried
out, but I'm appalled at the damage done to the career of a fine detective. Zeal is a
commendable trait but not when it overrides the truth, something you swore to uphold
when I asked you to come aboard."
Through this speech, he had neither moved nor taken his gaze from her. His expression
was carefully neutral, but there was a certain clipped cadence to his words that revealed
to the DCI, who after all knew him best, both the depth and the breadth of his anger. This
was not a man to be made a fool of, this was not a president to forgive and forget. The
DCI had counted on this when he prepared his damning report.
"Ms. Alonzo-Ortiz, my administration has no place for political opportunists—at least,
not those who are willing to sacrifice the truth in order to cover their own ass. The truth is,
you should've aided in the investigation of the murders instead of trying your best to bury
those falsely implicated. If you had, we might have uncovered this terrorist, Stepan
Spalko, soon enough to have averted the bloodbath at the summit. As it is, we all owe a
debt of gratitude to the DCI, especially you."
At this last, Roberta Alonzo-Ortiz winced, as if the president had dealt her a terrific
blow, which, in a sense, he very deliberately had.
He picked up a single sheet of paper off his desk. "Therefore, I accept your letter of
resignation and grant your request to return to the private sector, effective immediately."
The former NSA opened her mouth to speak, but the president's laser-like stare froze
her in her tracks. "I wouldn't," he said shortly.
She blanched, nodded slightly in submission, and turned on her heel. The moment the
door closed behind her the DCI took a deep breath. For a moment the president's gaze
intersected his and all was revealed. He knew why his Commander-in-Chief had
summoned him to witness the NSA's humiliation. It was his way of making an apology.
In all his years toiling as a servant of his country, the DCI had never before been
apologized to by the president. He was so overcome he had no idea how to respond.
In a daze of euphoria, he rose. The president was already on the phone, his eyes roving
elsewhere. For a brief moment, the DCI paused, savoring his moment of triumph. Then
he, too, departed the sanctum sanctorum, striding down the hushed corridors of power
that he had made his home.
David Webb had finished hanging the multicolored happy birthday sign in the living
room. Marie was in the kitchen, putting the finishing touches on the chocolate cake she'd
baked for Jamie's eleventh birthday. The smells of pizza and chocolate drifted deliciously
through the house. He looked around, wondering if there were enough balloons. He
counted thirty— surely, that was more than enough.
Though he'd returned to his life as David Webb, his ribs pained him with every breath
he took and the rest of his body ached enough for him to know that he was also Jason
Bourne and always would be. For so long he'd been terrified each time that side of his
personality resurfaced, but now with Joshua's reemergence, everything had changed. He
had a compelling reason to become Jason Bourne again.
But not with the CIA. With Alex's death, he was quits with them, even though the DCI
himself had asked him to stay, even though he actually liked and respected Martin

Lindros, the man responsible for having the sanction against him lifted. It was Lindros
who had admitted him to Bethesda Naval Hospital. In between bouts with a team of
Agency-vetted specialists, who had seen to Webb's wounds and had carefully examined
his cracked ribs, Lindros had debriefed him. The DDCI had made a difficult task almost
easy, allowing Webb precious time to sleep and unwind from his arduous trials.
But after three days Webb wanted nothing more than to return to his students, and he
needed time with his family, even though there was now an ache in his heart, a certain
void given form and shape by Joshua's return. He'd meant to tell Marie about him, had in
fact told her every other detail of what had happened while they'd been out of touch. And
yet each time he had come to the subject of his other son, his brain shut down. It wasn't
that he was afraid of her reaction—he trusted her too much for that. It was his own
reaction he was unsure of. After only a week away he felt estranged from Jamie and
Alison. He'd completely forgotten Jamie's birthday until Marie had gently reminded him.
Like the proverbial line in the sand, he felt a clear demarcation of his life before Joshua's
startling appearance and after. There was the darkness of grief and now there was the
light of re-connection. There was death and now, miraculously, there was life. He needed
to understand the implications of what had happened. How could he share something so
monumental with Marie until he understood it himself?
And so, on this, his young son's birthday, his mind was flooded with thoughts of his
older son. Where was Joshua? Shortly after he'd heard from Ozskar that Annaka Vadas'
body had been found by the side of the motorway leading to Ferihegy Airport, Joshua had
slipped away, vanishing as quickly and completely as he had appeared. Had he returned
to Budapest to see Annaka one last time? Webb hoped not.
In any case, Karpov had promised to keep his secret, and Webb believed him. He
realized that he had no idea where his son lived or even if he had a real home. It was
impossible to imagine where Joshua was or what he might now be doing, and this caused
a pain in Webb unlike any other. He felt the lack of him as acutely as if he'd lost a limb.
There was so much he wanted to say to Joshua, so much time to make up for. It was
difficult being patient, painful not even knowing whether Joshua would choose to come
to him again.
The party had begun, the twenty or so kids playing and yelling at the tops of their lungs.
And there was Jamie in the center of it all, a born leader, a boy others his own age looked
up to. His open face, so like Marie's, was shining with happiness. Webb wondered
whether he'd ever see such a look of unalloyed pleasure on Joshua's face. Instantly, as if
there was a telepathic link between them, Jamie glanced up and, seeing his father's gaze
on him, grinned hugely.
Webb, having drawn greeter duty, once again heard the bell ring. He opened the door
to find a FedEx agent with a package for him. He signed for it and at once took it down to
the basement, where he unlocked a room to which there was only one key. Inside was a
portable X-ray machine Con-klin had procured for him. All packages coming to the
Webbs were, unbeknownst to the children, run through this machine.
Determining it was clean, Webb opened it. Inside were a baseball and two gloves, one
for him and the other just the right size for an eleven-year-old. He unfolded the
accompanying note, which read, simply:
For Jamie's birthday —Joshua

David Webb stared at the gift, which meant more to him than anyone would ever know.
Music drifted down to him from above, along with the intermittent laughter of the
children. He thought of Dao and Alyssa and Joshua as they existed in his splintered
memory, and this kaleidoscopic image, stimulated by the sharp, earthy scent of the oiled
leather, was brought vividly to life. Reaching out, he felt the supple grain of the leather,
ran his fingertips over the rawhide stitching. What memories were stirring inside him!
His smile, when it came to his face, was bittersweet. He slipped his hand into the larger
of the gloves and threw the baseball into the heart of it. Catching it there, he held it as
tightly as if it were a will-o'-the-wisp. He heard a light tread on the top of the stairs, and
then Marie's voice calling to him.
"I'll be right up, sweetheart," he said.
He sat very still for some moments longer, allowing the events of the recent past to
swirl around him. Then he exhaled deeply and set aside the past. With Jamie's present
cradled in the other hand, he mounted the basement stairs and went to rejoin his family.

